# Introduction
January 24, 2022

## An Engineering Approach to Software
How do we specify a big system? Most big pieces of software have different versions for different platforms, constructed of different components or modules for both GUI/front-ends and data/back-ends. Software should work extremely similarly across all platforms and architectures involved. As well, writing software needs to be an accessible activity - otherwise, it becomes exhorbitantly expensive.

High-level languages, multi-programming (TSOs- time-sharing operations), and modularity are some solutions to these problems. Languages like Java and Python increase the readability and feasability of programming tasks. Modular structured programming allows for reuse of code in a single "method" and allows for easier maintainability. Structured techniques, or the "classical method" of software engineering, became popular starting in 1970. Object-oriented programming also became a popular paradigm.

1975 was the first official International Conference on Software Engineering, where IEEE specifications were written, and Structured Analysis and Design Techniques were standardized. The following year, the Software Development Life Cycle (SDLC) model from B. Boehm first appeared.

In later years (late-1980s), it was noticed that costs of computing between hardware and software started to invert - maintaining software grew from 20% of the total cost, to more than 60% over just 30 years. Rapid prototyping, engineer education, and incremental development are all emphasized in modern SWE to decrease the share of software costs in computing.

### Object oriented programming
UML is a notation for software development, utilizing object-oriented programming to define objects and their properties.

## Scope of Software Engineering
According to IEEE, software engineering is an application of systematic and disciplined, quantifiable approaches to development, operation, and maintenance of software. Schach says that the aim in a product which is fault-free, satisfies user needs, and is delivered on-time and within budget (PCQT: Productivity, Quality, Cost, Time). The foundations of software engineering include SLC/process models, methods, and tools. The process models define the behavioral and operational procedures; methods provide technical solutions to achieve SLC tasks; and tools provide support for realizing methods, ideally in an automated way.

### SDLC steps
- Requirement analysis and specifications
- Design
- Implementation (coding)
- Testing
- Delivery
- Maintenance