## The Software Development Process
January 26, 2022

## Process Models
A process model is a series of prescribed, predictable steps which would help create timely, quality results. Without a process model, development can tend to become disorganized, and a lack of control can create a chaotic development process. Modern software engineering requires an "agile" approach to the process and it is essential not to bog down the developers with unnecessary controls and activities.

## Process Activities
Generic process activities include communication, which encompasses requirements and specification analysis of the software, planning of time and resources, design/modeling, and construction. Construction involves the implementation and testing of the software. Deployment is ideally the last step, involving operation and maintenance of the software.

In addition, a set of management, or "umbrella," activities such as project tracking and control, risk management, quality assurance, configuration management, technical reviews, and others are applied throughout the process. 

It is essential to order these activities on the right sequence, by following a prescribed process flow.

## Process Flow
Process flows can be linear (step by step), iterative (where steps are repeated as necessary), evolutionary (where the entire or part of the cycle is repeated), and parallel (where steps happen simultaneously). Each flow method has its own pros and cons - linear flow is very complication-free, but can be slow if there are bottlenecks. Parallel flow can be very efficient by tackling multiple tasks at once, but requires thorough testing and a well-defined integration progress to avoid clashing changes.

## Requirements
Requirements are characterized as wants and needs. The functional requirements, known as the **operational requirements**, are the client's conceptualization of the software and the set of tasks which they want to have accomplished. A developer will determine the how to implement these wants, and any constraints involved. **Non-operational requirements** include many of these constraints, such as security, time, cost, performance, etc.

### Identifying a Task Set
A task set is a list of "to-do" items in order to accomplish a requirement. These include individual tasks as a subset of the overall task, a list of work products, or quality assurance filters which need to be applied.

The task sets for requirements gathering action for a simple project may include:
1. Make a list of stakeholders for the project.
2. Invite all stakeholders to an informal meeting.
3. Ask each stakeholder to make a list of features and functions required.
4. Discuss requirements and build a final list.
5. Prioritize requirements.
6. Note areas of uncertainty.

The task sets for Requirements gathering action for a big project may include:
1. Interview each stakeholders separately to determine overall wants and needs. 
2. Build a preliminary list of functions and features based on stakeholder input.
3. Schedule a series of facilitated application specification meetings.

## Specifications
Once the requirements are identified, a contract of specifications between the client and the developers can be written which exactly describes the functionality of the product, and the constraints involved. Methods involved in specification contracting include data flow design, data structure orientation, object orientation, and others.

## Software Design
The design step brings together client requirements, business needs, and techincal considerations to form a framework for the design of a product. A model is created to provide detail about various components of the software, including architecture, algorithms, user interfaces, data structures, and data types.

## Implementation/Integration
This typically is the least labor-intensive part of the SDLC. A good specification and a careful design will make implementation very straightforward.

### Testing
Testing of the integrated code must be performed at various steps in the SDLC. These include module/unit testing of individual components, integration tests to see how modules work in the larger codebase context, validation testing to verify continuous operation of the softwarae, and others.

## Operation/Maintenance/Evolution
After the software is "completed," it is often the case that more improvements can or are needed to be made. These include correction of bugs or defects, preventative measures for future issues, enhancements, or adaptive improvements to other platforms. 