# Requirements Modeling
Feburary 14, 2022

User stories should be collected and converged into an analysis stage, so that requirements may be more accurately modeled. There are 4 basic categories of requirements modeling:
- Scenario-based: system from the user's point of view
- Class-oriented: defines objects, attributes, and relationships
- Flow-oriented: shows how data is transformed (functional flow) 
- Behavioral-oriented: shows impact of events on the system

The analysis model is a bridge between the general description of the system, and a more structured design model. Each element of the analysis model should add to an understanding of requirements, and provide basic insight into the description of the system. Infrastructure and non-functional aspects such as interfaces should be delayed until the design phase. The analysis model should be as simple as possible while still providing valuable details of the system.

## Strategies
One paradigm of modeling, called "structured analysis," considers data and transformational processes as separate entities. The data objects are modeled in a way that defines only their attributes and relationships. Thus, data flow and the data itself are separated concerns. Object-oriented analysis focuses on definition of classes and their collaborative relationships - transformation methods are encapsulated into their respective objects.

From a user story and its phrases, classes can usually be easily identified by nouns. Synonyms should be identified to avoid duplicating similar classes, and nouns can be separated into problems and solutions. External entities, things, events, roles, units, places, and structures can all be modeled as classes. Saved information, services, common attributes and operations, and essential requirements can potentially be encapsulated into classes as well, to avoid repetiton and "spaghetti code."

Atrributes can be identified as descriptors, or properties of nouns. Therefore, discretion must be used when analyzing a phrase to avoid hyper-granularity. For example, does a simple noun like "age" need to be its own separate class? Or would it be better to have this be an attribute of a more abstract object? As well, some attributes which rely on a parameter (such as the circumference of a circle) might be better modeled as an operation.

Operations can usually be identified by verbs. They can be divided into 4 major categories:
- Data manipulation
- Computation
- State inquiry
- Event handling and monitoring

## CRC Models
Class-responsibility-collaborator cards provide a tangible way to identify and organize the classes of a system. It may seem like a low-tech method, but it does provide an easy way for non-technical stakeholders to understand the system. The main idea is to provide agility: the less time needed to spend on tecnhical aspects of the presentation of organization, the better.

A CRC card contains the name of the class, a short description, and its responsibilities and collaborations. Responsibilities can be thought of as anything which the class performs or does. For instance, a student attends classes, studies homework, and takes tests. Collaborators are the other classes which a class might interact with via its responsibilities. A student collaborates with its teachers, classrooms, and books.