# Requirement Modeling cont.
February 16, 2022

## Types of Classes
Classes are commonly broken into the **model-view-controller (MVC)** design pattern: classes can represent an entity directly from the statement of the problem (**model classes**), create an interface between the user and the software (**view/boundary classes**), or manage "units of work" to handle data flow or creation of other classes (**controller classes**).

## Responsibilites and Collaborations
Duties of knowledge should be spread through classes to organize the system. Each responsibility of the system should be stated as generally as possible, and encapsulated within a class using information to assign attributes and desired behavior to define methods. Responsibilities should be shared among related classes, if appropriate but in general information about a single thing should be contained in a single class.

Classes can fulfill responsibilities by either using its own ability to manipulate information, or by collaborating with other classes. Collaborations define relationships between classes, and the need for a collaboration is identified by determining whether a class and fulfill its responsibilities on its own. Three different relationships exist between classes:
- is-part-of
- has-knowledge-of
- depends-upon

For instance, a class may be an aggregate of other classes: a Player might have a PlayerHead, PlayerLegs, etc. Associations and dependencies are relationships which indicate either similarity, or some sort of functional reliance on another class, respectively.

## Packages
Elements of the analysis model such as classes and use-cases can be grouped together based on some sort of categorization. In UML, symbols are used to define class accessibility between elements of the package. Pluses (+) are used to indicate public classes, negatives (-) for private classes, and hashes (#) for protected classes.