# Extreme Programming and Scrum
February 7, 2022

## Extreme Programming (XP)
Originated by Kent Beck, XP is the most widely used Agile process model. XP planning begins with the creation of user stories, and a cost is assigned to each story. Stories are grouped together to form a deliverable increment, with a commitment deadline. After each increment, the **project velocity** is used to define subsequent delivery dates.

Developers are divided into small teams, and each team is assigned a small task, called a phase. Each phase is integrated as soon as it is completed. This allows for quick development of requirements but can result in lack of documentation as the product evolves quickly.

XP design follows the "keep it simple" principle and encourages the use of **"Class Responsibility Collaborator" (CRC)** cards. Re-factoring of code is used frequently for simplicity but a **"spike solution,"** a prototype for a specific complex part of the product, may be developed when a difficult problem is encountered.

XP coding encourages pair programming and development is driven by testing. It is recommended to write a unit test before coding takes place. All unit tests are to be performed daily, and final acceptance testing is defined by the customer.

The original XP model was based on 29 distinct rules over 5 core categories: planning, managing, designing, coding, and testing. However, like Agile in general, there are many different variants of the model.

### Planning
**User stories** are written by the customer and indicates what the product is expected to do. Similar to use cases, each story is focused on one thing that the customer needs from the system. This provides a list of objectives rather than a dense requirements document. A user story, like the project at large, has four variable properties which affects the success of completion: scope (how big is it?), resources (how much does it cost?), time (how long will it take?), and quality (how well will it work?). By analyzing these variables and their effect on each other, a **release plan** can be developed to estimate the total time required for each story. From there, a goal for project velocity can be determined. XP relies on frequent, small releases by dividing the project into **iteration plans,** usually lasting one week in length. Iteration planning occurs at the start of every iteration or phase, and forms the development tasks to be worked on. The customer can contribute by organizing stories into order of importance. An increment is planned based on user stories, current release status, project velocity, and feedback.

### Managing
Teams should be arranged in an open, but dedicated, workspace. The idea is fostering open communication. Each day begins with a stand-up meeting to describe yesterday's progress, the goal for the day, and obstacles which may hinder progress. Project velocity can be re-evaluated and roles may be adjusted as necessary.

### Designing
There is a great focus on simplicity in XP designing. A simple design is easier to test, and it is important that the design meets only the current requirements. Refactoring is used constantly to keep up with changes in requirements. CRC cards are used in conjunction with a **system metaphor** in order to create an abstraction of the project, represented by classes and objects which make it easy to explain to new people.

### Coding
Pair programming is highly recommended, especially due to the principle that unit tests are always written first. As soon as the task is complete, it is integrated into the system (known as **continuous integration**). The customer should be available to assist in clarifying requirements and to provide feedback. 

Pair programming requires dual ownership of the written code, and both people must understand everything happening at all times.

### Testing
All written code must have a corresponding unit test. All code must pass a unit test before its task is considered complete. Every bug found in the software requires a new unit test. Acceptance tests from the user are performed often and quantified into a score, which is routinely published to track progress.

## Using XP
XP works best with small harmonious teams who will create a project with functional requirements changing every few months. Customers must be ready to commit availability to the project. The development domain must allow frequent easy testing to happen, and programming productivity must be kept high. Advantages include a highly transparent and accountable process. However, there are criticisms of XP, particularly with pair programming. Also, there is skepticism on how well developers, managers, and customers can all work harmoniously together.

---

## Scrum
In 1986, *Harvard Business Review* published a study by Takeuchi and Nonaka called "The New New Product Development Game," comparing high-performance, cross-functional teams to the "scrum" formation used in Rugby. Teams must coordinate using their own individual strengths in order to tackle an objective. Software Engineering researcher Jeff Sutherland borrowed the term to describe his Agile methodology.

There are three main roles in a Scrum team:
- Product owner(s), who is responsible for the business value of the project
- Scrum Master, who ensures that the team is functional and productive
- Team Members, who self-organize to achieve a goal

"Artifacts," or assets of the Scrum process, include the product backlog (prioritized list of desired project 
outcomes/features), sprint backlog (set of work from the product backlog, broken into tasks, that the team agrees to complete in a sprint), and burn-down chart (remaining work to be completed).

Ceremonies take place at milestones in the process.
- Sprint planning occurs when the team meets with the product owner to choose a set of work to deliver during a sprint
- Daily scrum meetings, led by the Scrum Master, take place every day to share struggles and progress
- Sprint reviews demonstrate what has been accomplished during a sprint to the product owner
- Sprint retrospectives take place to reflect and improve upon the product and process

The process flow can be generalized into 8 major steps:
1. A product owner creates a prioritized wish-list (product backlog).
2. During sprint planning, the team pulls a small chunk from the top of that wish-list (sprint backlog) and decides how to implement those pieces.
3. The team has a certain amount of time (sprint), to complete its work - usually two to four weeks.
4. Team meets each day to assess its progress (daily scrum) & Scrum Master keeps the team focused on its goal.
5. At the end of the sprint, the work should be potentially shippable, as in ready to hand to a customer, put on a store shelf, or show to a stakeholder.
6. The sprint ends with sprint review and retrospective.
7. A new sprint begins and the team chooses another chunk of the product backlog to work on.
8. The cycle repeats until enough items in the product are in place to deliver a shippable product. 