# Requirements Engineering
February 9, 2022

The main objective of requirements is to determine the needs of your client, as well as the constraints involved. Coming up with a common understanding is not always easy, especially if the client is not sure about what they want.

## Inception and Elicitation
Inception establishes a basic description of the problem. It involves bringing everyone together to the same page and determines the nature of the solution required. During elicitation, stakeholders are asked what is to be accomplished by the product, how it fits into the needs on the business, and its everyday use cases.

Informal techniques for starting these tasks include interviews, questionnaires, and forms. From there, scarios can be developed to describe the behavior of the product, as well as the interaction between the product and the user. As soon as a loose framework is established, work can begin on a rapid prototype to demonstrate key functionality. The key to a successful prototype involves rapid development, ability for evolution and change, and the bare-bones nature of the work (no error checking, database functions, or polished UI).

## Elaboration
This step focuses on analyzing the structure of the requirements and developing a model bases on the findings. Model examples include functional modeling, object-oriented modeling, and many others. 

**Data flow diagrams** serve as a functional model to follow, tracing how data in passed through functions of the product. DFDs have four basic components: entities, operations, data flows, and databases. **Backus normal form (BNF)** can be used to define a **data dictionary** of sequences, selections, and repetitions, in order to describe data syntax out of their real-world contexts.

**Object-oriented modeling** uses a graphical representation, almost always using UML, to describe the product. Objects can be arranged based on use-case modelling (behaviorial), class modelling (data relations), or dynamic modelling (state-transitions).

A use-case is a sequence of steps tied together to achieve a goal. A scenario is one set of steps in a use-case - a single use-case can contain any number of scenarios. A **use-case diagram** represents all use-cases of the system. Main elements of a UCD include actors (the entities which interact with the system), the use-cases, relationships between the use-cases, as well as the system itself. UCDs offer an effective way to describe the total functionality of the system and easily communicates objectives with stakeholders.

**Class modelling** identifies objects with attributes, and their relationships to other objects. "Noun extraction" can be a good strategy to create classes, and the class-responsibility-collaborator methodology can link objects to others. Classes can be broken down into three categories:
- Boundary classes, which provide an interface between software and external actors (like a user interface, device interface, etc)
- Control classes, which provides coordination for system behaviors and controls other classes
- Entity classes, which represent data from real-world objects like events, people, etc.

**Dynamic modelling** involves analyzing the different states of the software, and how they might change to another state. This is often used in conjunction with definition of control classes to handle state transitions in objects.

## Specification
Specification is a formal detailed document built from the models developed in the elaboration of requirements. It is not always written down, and may exist just as an idea, but a tangible specification in writing can prove useful when business issues (legal, etc), software requirement complexity, or gaps in communication may make a problem from lack of documentation.

## Validation
This final step analyzes the found requirements to make sure that they are stated consistently and completely. It is performed typically by a **formal technical review,** in which a committee confirms that the specifications clearly indicates the purpose of the product, as well as how that purpose will be performed and implemented.

A technical review team will include at least a moderator, tasked with leading and recording the review; an author who reads the document and creates necessary changes; and a reviewer, who inspects the document. Sometimes responsibilities may be split further, creating a reader or a scribe role.

Steps to validation during a review are as follows:
1. Planning: The author gives the document to the moderator. The moderator decides who, when and where document distributed.
2. Preparation: Each reviewer works alone for some specified time.
3. Inspection meeting: The moderator chooses someone (typically author) to read and explain the doc. The scribe records the defects **as detected.**
4. Report generation: Within days of the meeting, moderator generates a report that lists the types and severity of defects.
5. Rework: The moderator assigns defects to someone (typically the author) to repair.
6. Follow-up: The moderator is responsible for seeing that all rework is carried out.