# Implementation and Integration
March 30, 2022

## A Brief History of Languages

### 1st generation (1950's)
In the beginning of programming as a profession, Assembly language was the main player in programming around. It required knowledge of the nuts and bolts of the machine, and to accomplish the same task which a HLL accomplishes in a single line requires multiple lines and commands. However, it is directly connected to machine language and is thus extremely fast.

### 2st generation (Late 1950's to 1960's)
Next, FORTRAN and COBOL were big players and widened the world of programming. Both of these in particular were very good at handling numerical accuracy, and thus were widely adopted. Algol was another candidate for the scientific community. BASIC opened up the world of programming to the everyman, requiring very little knowledge of computer architecture to get started.

### 3st generation (Late 1960's to 1990's)
From the late 60's, languages started to evolve rapidly. PL/I, Pascal, and Ada were top players for general-purpose programming, until C came around and became the dominant force. As well, object-oriented languages started to show up, and Smalltalk was the first to implement this idea. However, C++ was the clear winner of the OOP popularity contest, and remains the most versatile object-oriented language to this day. Specialized languages such as Lisp and Prolog also came to prominence during this period. Lisp is particularly very efficient at processing lists, and remained popular for many decades. Prolog became very popular in the 80's, particularly in the field of expert systems and early AI.

### 4th generation
After the advent of the Internet, languages needed the ability for browser execution without requiring native compilation. Platform agnostic languages became the standard for this purpose, which gave rise to Java as a widely used language. As well, Non-procedural languages such as SQL and PowerBuilder widened access to data processing and querying. As well, formal specification languages allowed for the descriptive writing of a program using algebraic or models instead of a specific programming syntax.

## Choosing a Programming Language
There are many factors which influence the choice of a programming language. Perhaps the most obvious is the application area - some languages are better at certain task environments than others. As well, the capability of a programming team needs to be considered; it is not reasonable to demand a program be written in Java if the team only uses C++. However, customer demands do need to be taken into account for business requirements, such as latency or program size. Cost-benefit analysis should consider the choice of a programming lnaguage in its calculations - the availability of talent will greatly influence this price tag. Characteristics of the language can also play a role in making this decision, such as available tooling, libraries, or features such as bitwise manipulation. As maintenance is a core activity of software engineering, it is important that source code is readable as the project grows and evolves. Thus, the readability of the language, scalability of memory management and exception handling, and level of type checking must also be considered.

## Programming Style and Standards
Style is a personal choice, but that choice needs to be compatible with the choices of others. Thus, a standard style needs to be aadopted, and consistency is key. Variable names should have meaningful names, and conform to an agreed format. Single statements should occupy their own lines to avoid unnecessary complexity. Indentation and casing of names should be standardized, and modern IDE tools can help to format code to a specification.

Functions and methods should be readable, and should not contained repeated code - the DRY principle indicates that repeat commands can be broken into a separate function. In general, a method or function should accomplish a single task. Sometimes tasks are composed of smaller sub-tasks. It is up to the programmer to decide how granular the code should be.

Documentation should reveal intent, and explain what the code is doing in the plainest of English. Code should be self-documenting whenever possible, through intuitive names or return values. Collections and lists should be names with plural words. Index variables should follow the standard of i, j, and k. Mathematic equations and formulas should follow established lingustic conventions - pi should be referred to as "pi,"" rather than "magicCircleRatioFromGod." Furthermore, exhaustive or overly descriptive names should be avoided.

Comments should be limited to documentation whenever possible, except to explain the most confounding code (like the inverse square root function from Quake, for example). Modules should contain a header with programmer name, date, description, and perhaps a short changelog.

Other standards, such as max nesting levels, use of semi-colons, etc. may be imposed by a quality assurance team.