# Testing
April 13, 2022

Testing is a process of executing the program with the intent of uncovering bugs and errors. A good test case is one which has a high probability of finding new exceptions. It is not useful to design exhaustive test cases, like running the set of integers through a method, for example. They should ideally be executable in linear time. The Pareto principle states that 80% of defects can be traced to 20% of the source code - thus, the presence of a testable error indicates that the source module should be tested extensively. 

Good tests have the following characteristics:
- A good test has a high probability of finding an error. The tester must understand the software and how it might fail  
- A good test is not redundant. Testing time is limited and one test tests should not overlap in their functions.
- A good test should be “best of breed”  
- Tests that have the highest likelihood of uncovering a whole  
class of errors should be used  
•A good test should be neither too simple nor too complex  
- Each test should be executed separately; combining a series of tests  
could cause side effects and mask certain errors

There are two major sections of testing: white-box and black-box. 

## White-box Testing
Also known as "glass-box" testing, the test designer analyzes the code to find a measure of logical complexity in its functional/procedural design. A flow chart or graph is an excellent way to map out the execution of the code. From this graph, tests should be design to execute every statement in the program at least one time. 

### Graph Theory
The flow graph has 3 main elements: sequences, branches (if statements), and iterations (loops). A node of the graph represents a sequence of block of procedural code. A node containing a simple conditional expression is referred to as a **predicate node**. A compound condition, such as those linked by AND or OR operators, should be separated into individual predicate nodes. Each predicate node has two edges leading out of it, representing true and false conditions. Edges represent flow of control, and each edge must start and end at a node. As well, edges to not cross or intersect. Areas bounded by a set of edges are called regions - as well, the "open" environment outside of a closed set of edges and nodes is counted as a region.

### Linearly Independent Paths
Paths through the program, originating at the start and terminating at the end of the program, which indicate at least one new set of processing statements in known as a **linearly independent path (LIP)**. Each path must move along at least one "new" edge which has not been traversed by a previous execution path. The set of all LIPs is known as the **basis set**.

### Cyclomatic Complexity
The number of independent paths in the basis set is defined as the **cyclomatic complexity (CC)**. This measure provides a quantitative measure of the logical complexity, as well as an upper bound for the number of tests which must be written in order to test every executable statement of the code. This CC can be computed in three ways:
- Counting the number of regions
- $V(G)=E-N+2$, where $E$ is the number of edges and $N$ is the number of nodes in the graph $G$
- $V(G)=P+1$, where $P$ is the number of predicate nodes in the graph $G$
