# Testing cont.
April 18, 2022

## White-Box Testing Methods
There are basic path testing steps we can follow to make sure that white-box testing covers the entire flow graph of the application:
1) Draw the complete flow graph
2) Determine the Cyclomatic Complexity
3) Determine the basis set of LIPs
4) Prepare test cases to traverse each LIP

Loop testing focuses exclusively on the validity of loop constructs. There are 4 types of loops: simple loops, concatenated loops, nested loops, and unstructured loops.

Simple loop testing should consist of a suite of six test cases:
1) 0 times through the loop
2) 1 time through the loop
3) 1 < m < n-1 (general case, approx. m= n/2)
4) n-1 times
5) n times
6) n+1 times

Nested loops should start at the inner most loop, with all outer loops at their initial condition values. Then, each inner loop can be tested as a simple loop using the above cases.

Concatenated loops are declared sequentially but linked by some shared function or variable. For instance, a loop may depend on a variable which has been incremented by another previous loop. Each loop should undergo the 6 simple loop cases above.

## Black-box Testing
Viewing the functions of the program as "black boxes," these tests feed input into the functions (or system as a whole) to test them.

### Equivalence Partitioning
This testing method strives to uncover classes of errors by varying input, including invalid inputs. For instance, functions with integer input might be tested using numbers within the typical range of inputs, as well as testing with numbers above and below what may be considered valid. Booleans can be tested by using both true and false values as input.

### Orthogonal Arrays
This is used when the number of inputs to the system is small, but large enough to allow for exhaustive testing of every possible input. Therefore, each permutation of parameters to the system can be tested individually. Single mode faults can be narrowed down to a scenario where one specific paramter is causing an error. Double mode faults, likewise, cause failure when two specific parameters operate together.

## Object-Oriented Testing
Testing in an OO paradigm consists of 4 steps:
1) Model review
2) Unit tests
3) Integration tests
4) Validation tests

A model review consists of an analysis of the design model(s) to define every class of the system. Unit tests (aka class tests) are written to test individual classes. Integration tests are written to test classes in collaboration, as they operate in the system; these include thread-based tests, use-based tests, and cluster tests. Validation testing covers the system as a whole, and compares results to the requirements of the end user.