# Maintenance
April 27, 2022

Maintenance refers to the changes that are made after the software is deployed. Bug fixes, legal issues, and deprecated libraries can all influence the need for additional changes after the product is delivered to the customer. As well, "future-proofing" can necessitate a change after deployment, such as the Y2K bug.

As time has progressed, maintenance has skyrocketed in cost, from approx 20% of total cost in 1960 to 60% in 1990. Hardware costs decreased, as new software languages were invented and software engineering practices emerged. As such, documentation often had to be written from scratch and re-writing/re-factoring code became a frequent task.

Now, modern engineering methods mandate a need for documentation, and tools exist for maintenance such as software configuration management, reverse engineering, debuggers, and regression testing (making sure recent changes don't impact existing features).

## Types
Perfective maintenance makes up around 50-55% of total maintenance bandwidth, and adds new capabil while generally enhanci the product. Common tasks include adding new require, new help features, UX/UI changes

Adaptive maintenance is about 20-25% of total maintenance, which modifies software to interface properly with new or changing processing equipment (hardware, infrastructure, operating systems).

Corrective maintenance makes up the remaining portion of the total, and includes diagnosis and remediation of defects in an existing system. Corrections range from revising a user manual to catastrophic defects which escaped testing.

Preventative maintenance combines areas of adaptive and corrective maintenance, and involves improving future reliability or providing better base for future enhancement.

## Performing Maintenance

helpful concepts 