# Integration Strategies
There are two categories in which you can place a program's modules: logic modules and work modules. A driver module is an example of a logic module, which describes the structure of the program. There are options for strategies to integrate modules into the program.

## Top-down integration
This approach starts with a driver or "main" module and works integration down through the rest of the program. One benefit of this approach is that fault isolation is more efficient, as testing is performed from the driver as an entry point. Thus, each new module is tested completely as it is imtegrated. Also, "logic first" is a helpful programming context for some people. However, work modules might now be tested well enough since they are typically added last.

## Bottom-up integration
As the name implies, this is the opposite approach to top-down. Work modules are tested frequently and logic is tested late, meaning that a program may need to be re-designed if the required logic is overly complex or unapproachable.

## Sandwich integration
This combines the previous two approaches, integrating work modules and logic modules simultaneously.

## Team Organization
### Weinberg
These teams cannot be very large, as each member has an equal voice, power, and responsibility. Thus, everyone must communicate with everyone else, and efficiency suffers as teams grow larger. Direct communication is easier, and the same power/responsibility among each member gives a sense of ownership and encourages higher interest. Members are more likely to admit mistakes, which allows for better discovery of errors. However, there is no hierarchy or structure in communication, and heightened sense of ownership can backfire as changes may be taken personally. This can result in the loss of a member, or worse, the breakup of an entire team.

### Chief-Programmer
A hierarchical organization in which a chief is in charge of the technical and programming management roles of the project. A backup programmer should act alongside the chief and would hold equal knowledge, power, and responsibility of the project. As well, a secretary will handle all secretarial work as needed. With this hierarchy, communication structure is clear and each person has a defined function. As well, redundancy is built in with a backup chief. Disadvantages include the requirement for high acumen professionals for the role of both chief and its backup.

### XP
Typically, this is arranged as "micro-teams" with a programmer and a tester as a single unit, utilizing pair programming. Micro-teams are organized under a program manager. This can provide very quick results as Agile tasks may be assigned to a micro-team or group, and development can be accomplished in parallel. As well, the programmer does not test their own code, so bias is less apparent.

### Hybrid
Technical and management responsibilities are divided into separate roles, and two people would oversee a number of teams. For larger groups, a project leader and project manager will oversee multiple teams, each with its own leader and manager. 