# Refactoring
April 6, 2022

The main idea of refactoring is taking jumbled code or messy structuring, which may have been hastily assembled in initial stages of implementation, and organizing it in a more efficient, meaningful way.

At the very simplest definition, renaming variables falls under refactoring. However, true refactoring activities are more involved - removing redundancy, reducing coupling, etc.

Refactoring is defined as changes made to the internal structure of software in order to make it easier to understand, and cheaper to modify without modifying observable behavior.

## Code Smells
A term coined by Beck and Fowler, this signified code which is any characteristic in the source code of a program that possibly indicates a deeper problem.

IDEs frequently feature refactoring tools which can automate refactoring activities.

### Duplicated Code
When the same code is written many times, it can be **extracted** to its own method or function. As well, subclasses of a superclass may contain duplicated common code, which can be **pulled up** to the superclass and inheirited, rather than duplicated in each class.

### Long Functions/Methods
Long methods are hard to read and often are written to handle more than one major task. These methods can be separated, also using the **extract** strategy. 

### Large Classes
Similar to long functions, large classes tend to have too much responsibility. A subclass may be defined and code which is uncommonly used ay be **extracted**. Sometimes, so much responsibility may be extracted that it makes sense to define a whole new class out of it.

### Long Parameter List
Many new APIs do well with managing parameter lists, but this smell is typical of older APIs. For instance, the win32 has methods which take over 10 parameters. This can be refactored by **introducing a parameter object**. This is a helper class tasked only with collecting and grouping parameters together to pass them to another method.

### Divergent Changes
As a project evolves, new features are added which may introduce changes frequently to a specific class. In these cases, it makes sense to **extract** each new feature into its own class or interface, and link them to the existing class in order to protect code that already works.

### Shotgun Surgery
The opposite of divergent changes, this occurs when a change requires small changes to many classes. This is a bad scenario to be tasked with, and it can break things easily if not performed correctly. An easier way to handle these changes is to create a class, **move methods and fields** into it, and link it with the new changes to the existing classes.

### Feature Envy
Sometimes, extracting methods to a class is performed prematurely, when it is not always necessary. In cases when a class is frequently uses data and functionality from another class, it may make sense to **move** those items into the class utilizing them.

### Data Classes
In initial development, it may be common to find that classes contain only getter and setter methods. These classes exist only to hold data, and it may simply code to **move** data into the class which uses it.

## When to Refactor
Agile practices suggest continuous refactoring throughout the design process. As well, refactoring can occur when new features are introduced or bugs are found. Code Reviews introduce the opportunity for refactoring as well, and organizations frequently require projects to undergo this process before they are deployed.