# Intro to Theory of Computation
September 2, 2022

This class is purely a computer science course, namely how computers work on a theoretical level as a mathematical model. This class will attempt to answer "what is possible that a computer can perform?"

## Basic Set Notation
In this class, we will be dealing with sets frequently. A set is a collection of items without duplicates. Typlically a set is described as $S$, with a subscript as needed with multiple sets.

We can perform operations on sets. The union ($\bigcup$) operation takes items that are in one set *or* the other set. The intersection ($\bigcap$) operation takes items which are common to both sets (i.e. items which are in one set *and* the other set). The complement ($\overline{S}$) operation results in all items from the universal set $U$ which are not in a specified set. 

The set difference ($/$) operation takes items from one set which are not in the other set. The delta operation takes the symmetric difference of two sets; that is, the set of elements that are in either set, but not in both.

The $\in$ symbol indicates the elements of a set; the $+$ symbol indicates one or more of the element preceding the symbol.

The cardinality of a set refers to the number of elements in the set.

A subset is described as a set of elements that are also in another set. A *proper subset* describes a set in which it is a subset of a set, but that subset does not contain all elements of the whole set.

For more information about sets, refer to [COMP 256 notes](../comp256/).

Additionally, we can concatenate sets (using the $\cdot$ symbol) which is similar to a union operation; however, in unions, order doesn't matter. In concatenation, order *does* matter.

## Functions
A **function** is classified into 1 of 3 **magnitudes**, which can be considered as performance metrics of the functions:
- Big O - the best case performance
- Big Omega - the worst case performance
- Big Theta - the best of the worst case performance