# Job Topics
September 1, 2022

## Recruiters
Most companies, especially larger ones, seek out new talent using recruiting firms. Departments will request new roles through HR and technical recruiters help to filter good & worthy candidates. Most jobs on popular job boards like Dice, Monster, etc. are actually placed by recruiters who represent the company. The nice part about this aspect is that many recruiters may represent multiple companies at any one time. The flip side about that is, they usually work on commission; if they don't fill the job, they don't get paid. So, while recruiters are a great source of job opportunities, they *don't care about you in particular.* If a recruiter sends you a job, do not feel pressured to take it.

As well, do not feel pressured to sign exclusivity contracts. Some recruiters may request that you do not work with other recruiters; this limits your prospects considerably. So, let them down gently, but do not cut yourself off voluntarily from other opportunities.

## Resumes
By themselves, resumes are not an effective tool for getting a job. They are statistically insignificant and a lot of them end up in a trash can. However, they are still a required document in the process.

Each position that you apply for shoul dhave a tailored resume, 1-2 pages in length, which includes experience specifically relevant to that role. However, you should also maintain a *master resume* which includes *every* piece of experience that you have acquired. Note that this still isn't as inclusive as a curriculum vitae; resumes should be tailored and edited to look the best for every single application.