# Introduction to Operating Systems
January 27, 2022

## The role of the operating system
The operating system is the main software that runs on the bare hw of the computer, acting as a bridge between the user and the computer. An operating system is not always necessary; for instance, the ENIAC did not have an operating system, instead switches and wires had to be manually moved and adjusted. We tend to think in high-level terms, instead of bits and electrical signals, so the operating system abstracts these low-level operations away so we can think and perform more efficiently, and not have to worry about what's going on "under the hood."

When is an OS required?
- Inputting a character from the keyboard
- Allocating memory for a data structure
- Loading a program into memory
- Calling a shared library function
- Exiting a program
- Sleeping for any amount of time

What can the computer do without an OS?
- Matrix manipulation
- Changing the layout of a document
- Calling a function defined within the current program

A lot of things rely on the OS (though not everything does!). So, it's a good tool to have and makes everyday computing a lot easier.

An operating system can abstract complex objects into general ideas. Combined with virtualization techniques, such as virtual memory, the operating system can act as an extended machine.

An operating system can also give the impression that programs are running concurrently (without implicit SMT). Multi-programming and time-sharing are techniques used to switch execution among different programs to maximize the use of the CPU and its resources.

## Operating System Hierarchy
Operating systems are extremely complex pieces of software, and abstraction + virutalization are used to divide the system into a hierarchy. This allows for maintainable development of well-defined subsystems.

### The Kernel
A kernel is the minimum set of functions necessary to manage the system resources. Typically, the kernel will manage communication of concurrent processes and activities, create and manage computational units, and provides for memory and device management. The kernel is the sole entity which can execute "privileged instructions" in the CPU's instruction set. The CPU can run in two specific modes; user mode prevents access to the privileged instructions, whereas kernel mode will allow both non-privileged and privileged instructions to be run. The kernel can provide services to higher-level software, but only the kernel can invoke privileged instructions.

### The Shell
The operating system will typically provide a graphical user interface (GUI), but at the very least will provide a shell interface. This is a bare-bones command interpreter which allows for textual input control via the keyboard. Anything which can be executed through a GUI can also be done using just the shell. In fact, expert users prefer to use the shell due to its flexibility and power of control, using special flags and parameters to accomplish specific tasks quickly. Scripts can also be written to automate multiple tasks in sequence.

### Syscalls and supervisor calls
Kernel fucntions can be accessed in a number of ways. System calls are usually implemented as a library of functions (such as SPIM for the MIPS architecture), which interpret given parameters from the caller application, and issues a corresponding supervisor call.

A supervisor call is a privileged instruction which transfers execution control to a specific part of the kernel. Supervisor calls are the interface between the kernel and higher level applications. When the kernel function terminates, control is returned to the caller function of the syscall library, after the CPU is set back into user mode. The library function can then handle events, input, or other processing before returning control to the application.

### Interrupts / Traps
An interrupt is an event triggered by a hardware signal from an external device, sent to the CPU. It diverts execution control to a specific location in the kernel to process the device's input/output. Two common uses of interrupts are, indeed, input and output operations such as those from keyboards, hard drives, etc. as well as implementation of time-sharing controls to switch context in the CPU.

A trap is a sort of internal interrupt" and is triggered by instructions. Errors and exceptions, such as dividing by zero, can result in a trap and will cause the operating system to abort execution of the program. As well, execution of a supervisor call will emit a trap since execution control is transferred to the kernel.

Both traps and interrupts will cause the control flow of the current program to stop, and transfers execution to the kernel. An interrupt handler is a kernel function which responds to specific interrupts and calls the appropriate kernel function in response. When the kernel function completes, control is returned to the program which was running prior to the interrupt. Interrupts are asynchronous events, in that they may be executed unpredictably between instructions; whereas, traps are synchronous events that are prescribed to happen as the result of an instruction.

## Evolution of Operating Systems
Historically, operating systems can be categorized into classes based on both available hardware technologies, as well as programming and application environments. Roughly 5 generations exist since the first viable modern digital computers were invented in the 1940's:
- vacuum tubes, in which there was little or no support from an operating system or system software and all programming was performed by the user
- transistors, in which punch cards could be used by the operating system to automate tasks in batches
- integrated circuits, where development of interrupts allowed for basic input and output to keyboards and displays, creating an interaxctive multi-user operating environment
- microprocessors, when the operating system began to oversee the wide-scale operation of the desktop/laptop computer via boot instructions, scheduling, and device & stored information management 
- networks, which saw the rise of connected supercomputers, distributed systems, and mobile devices, and placed responsibility for communication security and parallel processing on the operating system

Today, there are a wide variety of different types of operating systems in use:
- mainframes, which are used in large-scale enterprise organizations and emphasize high throughput and volume of data storange
- servers, widely used machine which provide fast and secure responses to individual client requests
- multiprocessors, which are connected together to perform accurate and consistent scientific computations
- distributed systems, which are individual computers connected by a network for efficient and secure communication
- personal computers, which provide a user-friendly interface for everyday tasks
- hand-helds, such as smartphones and tablets
- real-time systems, used in industrial and "smart" consumer devices to respond quickly to changing operating conditions
- sensor networks, such as wearable technology and industrial/environmental/military monitors