# Scheduling cont. (Interactive + Real-time)
February 15, 2022

For review, a batch process will go off and run by itself. Interactive processes require some sort of response to user input, and may require different scheduling algorithms in order to receive and respond to the interaction.

## Interactive Scheduling Algorithms
A time quantum is a small amount of time in which a process is allowed to use the CPU. Quanta are usually measured in 10-100 milliseconds.

In round-robin time-sharing algorithms, processes get equal amounts of time at the CPU, according to some defined slice of time. Each processes queues up and the CPU simply goes down the line, allowing each member process to use the resources according solely to their place in line. This idealizes "equality" at the CPU, but in the real world, this is rarely the best solution. Consider a process which receives a person's input through a camera - under round-robin, the frame rate would depend on how many processes were running at the time!

**Multilevel (ML)** scheduling provides a separate queue for each "level" or prioritization. Within each level queue, processes are scheduled using RR. **Multi-level feedback (MLF)** scheduling is similar, but handles starvation and fairness by varying the time quantum at each priority level, as well as dynamically changing the priority of each process as necessary. The highest level priority queue runs at a quantum of some time, and each level below runs at twice the amount of time as the above level. New processes enter at the highest priority and get kicked down the queue hierarchy as they accumulate CPU time. MLF favors short running processes and completes them at a higher priority than longer running process, which get licked to lower priorities as they continue.

### Performance of Interactive Algorithms
The response time of an interactive process is the elapsed time from the submission of an input. For a process running on its own, the response time will depend on the type of input. An input which requests a video from a server will have a higher process response time than one which inputs a character on the keyboard and requests that character to be entered in a text field on the screen. If multiple processes are running under time0sharing, the response time inevitably increases depending on the number of processes, the length of time quanta, and the duration of each context switch.

## Real-Time Scheduling Algorithms
Characterized by a deadline in which continual input must be processed fast enough to generate nearly instant output, a real-time process is exemplified by streaming media, control of robotic sensors, or self-driving cars. A period is a time interval within which each input must be processed. Thus, the end of the period is the deadline for responding to a given input.

A **rate monotonic (RM)** algorithm schedules processes according to the length of their period. The shorter the deadline, the higher the priority. Similarly, the **earliest deadline first (EDF)** algorithm schedules according to how much time is left in each process's period. Both RM and EDF algorithms are preemptive, meaning that a higher priority process can interrupt a running process. The main difference is that urgency, rather that duration, is prioritized with EDF, whereas RM can crank out short-period processes quickly.

### Performance of Real-Time Algorithms
A spectrum of urgency exists with batch algorithms on one end and real-time algorithms on the other. The most important goal of batch algorithms is to *complete the work,* whereas real-time algorithms must *complete the work by a given deadline.* A schedule is considered **feasile** if it is possible to meet all deadlines of scheduled processes. The portion of CPU time used by a process is given by the ratio of its total CPU time to its period. Thus, if fractional ratios of scheduled processes exceed 100 percent of CPU utilization, a schedule is not feasible. 