# Memory Management
March 15, 2022

A hardware device which is able to store data is called memory. Data is stored in physical memory in fixed-size units called **words**. Random-access memory (RAM) is one common instance of memory, also known as physical memory.

## Logical (Virtual) Memory
A physical address is an integer which identifies a word in the physical memory. This may be virtualized as a **logical address**, which references a **logical address space** mapped to a portion of the physical memory. This is needed because during program development, the starting address of a program in physical memory is not known. Memory is used more efficiently when a program is allowed to allocate sequentially, but this is not easy (or always feasible) to perform in physical memory. Thus, an abstraction is required for efficient memory management.

## Programs in Memory
Programs are arranged using units called modules. A **source module** is a program, or part of a program, which is written in a language and must be translated or compiled into an **object module** of machine code. Programs may stand alone in a single object or can consist of multiple objects connected by a **linker**. A **load module** is an executable ready to be loaded into main memory.

## Relocation
Physical addresses of programs and their components are not known until they are loaded into memory. Thus, it is the job of the linker and compiler to assign logical addresses to instructions and data, which may change as the program is written into object and load modules. Logical addresses are not mapped to physical memory until the final stages of the load process. Moving from one address to another is called **relocation**, and may occur between logical addresses, or between a logical and physical address. Relocation may be **static,** as logical addresses are bound to physical addresses prior to execution; it can also be **dynamic** as components are a program are loaded into memory only just before they are utilized during execution.

A **relocation register** (not to be confused with a program counter) contains the physical starting address of a program or a component in memory.  Most programs consist of 3 main components: source code, static data, and dynamic data. A memory management plan in the simplest sense represents a program as one unit, thus cramming all 3 components into one contiguous section of memory. A relocation register may be referenced during execution to implement dynamic relocation by adding the contents of the register to the logical addresses of the program. A more flexible approach would be to assign a relocation register for each component, allowing for the program's modules to exist in separate places in memory.

## Free Space
As information is moved into and out of main memory, the space as a whole is marked with free and occupied sections of different sizes. The OS must keep track of all free spaces via a linked list of "holes," and must be able to locate a hole of appropriate size for new program components to fit. The OS must also be able to join any adjacent holes into a bigger one. There are options to choose from when deciding on a strategy for this task:
- **First-fit** always starts the search for an adequate hole at the beginning of the linked list, and returns the first match
- **Next-fit** starts the search at the point of the last allocated hole
- **Best-fit** searches the entire list and returns the hole with a size closest to the size required
- **Worst-fit** is the opposite of best-fit and returns the largest available hole
The best strategy choice depends on the average request size, relative to the size of usable memory, as well as the variance in request sizes.

## Managing Insufficient Memory