# Deadlocks
March 3, 2022

## Representing Resources and Processes
Any computer system has a set of hardware and software resources which can be used by processes. These resources can be placed into one of two distinct categories: reusable & consumable. A reusable resource can be allocated, requested, and freed by a process, over and over. A consumable resource is normally emitted by a process to be used by another process. Reusable resources include processors, devices, memory, and files; consumables include messages, signals, and interrupts.

A **resource allocation graph** shows allocation and requests of resources and the processes involved. Processes in the graph are represented by circles, and resources by rectangles (if a resource contains multiple units, each resource is a circle contained within the rectangle). If an edge between nodes is directed from a process to a resource, it represents a request, and vice-versa for an allocation.

If a resource does not contain enough unallocated units to satisfy the one or more edges directed from a process, then that process is **blocked**. 

A **deadlock** occurs between two or more processes and resources (or resource units), where each process requests and uses a non-shared resource, and is blocked indefinitely by requesting the other resources by its fellow processes (which also are blocked). An assumption in analysis of deadlocks and resource maagement assumes that the program is coded correctly. It is certainly possible for a programmer to write code in which a process blocks itself indefinitely.

## State Transitions
A resource allocation graph describes a state in time of the system it references. Functions may be called on the system's resources to manipulate the graph and move the system into a new state: request, acquisition, and release.

A process is considered deadlocked if it is blocked on a resource request and no possible state transition will change that blocked status. A deadlock state occurs when two or more processes are deadlocked in a single state. If a sequence of all requests and releases by all processes is known, a **state stransition graph** may be constructed to analyze how the state of the system changes over time, as well as the possibility of deadlock states and **safe states,** which indicate that there is no possibility of deadlock.