# Detecting Deadlocks
March 5, 2022

## Graph Reduction
If there is a cycle in a resource allocation graph between two more more processes and *single-unit* resources, then a deadlock is certain to occur as each process blocks each other. However, for more complex graphs, this is not always so apparent. For example, a resource may contain multiple allocation units, so the ability to "draw" a cycle may not result in a deadlock. A graph reduction algorithm may be employed in order to detect a deadlock more efficiently:
```
while (unblocked_process p in graph) {
    select unblocked_process p;
    remove p; //including all edges connected to p
}
```
A graph is **completely reducible** if the completed algorithm results in a blank graph. From this, we can theorize that:
1. A state is in a deadlock state if and only if the resource graph for that state is not completely reducible.
2. All permutations of reduction sequences of a given resource allocation graph end with the same final graph result.
Given these theories, any sequence of reductions can determine whether or not a resource graph represents a deadlock state.

## Continuous Detection
Testing for, and therefore preventing, deadlock states is accomplished by examining the current state and its possibility to transition to deadlock. The next state can only be deadlocked if the transition is caused by a resource request, and a process p becomes deadlocked in that next state. We can utilize the graph reduction algorithm continuously until either the process p is removed from the graph, or there are no unblocked processes remaining in the graph. Then, the next state has no possibility of deadlock.

When working with resources which only contain one unit of allocation, a resource allocation graph can be translated to a **wait-for** graph by redrawing request edges from each resource to point to the process which holds that resource. This graph then only connects processes, indicating which processes are blocked on a resource held by another process.