# Files and File Systems
April 19, 2022

Information needs to be stored in for extended periods of time, even when the computer is turned off. The most common means for persistent, non-volatile storage is through use fo magnetic disks or tapes. The task of data management, as well as the wide variety of interfaces available for multitudes of devices, is an impractical task for a typical user. The **file system (FS)** portion of an OS handles this job by abstracting the concept of data and information into **files** and **directories**. Files and their contents are accessed through high-level operations provided by the FS interface, without the user having to know about the inner workings of the storage media. Depending on how the FS is implemented, a file may be viewed as an unstructured stream of bytes, or as a series of records. A **record** is a data structure which contains data items and types, identified by a record number or unique key. 

An **access method** is defined by a set of OS operations which are used by the UI to access files. The most common method is seuqential, where the FS tracks the current cursor position in the file and read/write operations are appended to the next series of bytes (or records) at the cursor location. There are also direct access methods used, which uses a record number or key value to reference a specific record at its location.

## File Types
Files are used by applications to store information, as well as to pass info to other applications. File producers and consumers must agree on a shared format to be able to read and write the file efficiently. Thus, every file must contain not only data, but also **metadata** about the file itself. This metadata stores the file's format as well as how the data is organizaed, and is usually stored in a **file header**. This header is only visible to the FS.

The header starts with a **magic number** which identifies the type of the file. The OS controls access to the file by restricting application permissions to a group of magic numbers or file types. For example, a word processing application cannot be used to read/write a file which does not start with a magic number that indicates a text file or word processor document. A better example is that the OS will only allow files with the correct magic number, assigned after successful compiling and linking, to be loaded into memory.

File extensions can be used instead to provide more user-firnedly context to file types. A sequence of one or more letters is appended to the end of the file name, which gives the user a hint as to which application is meant to be used to open the file. A drawback to relying on filenames is that they are not strongly enforced - a file extension can be changed without actually changing the file's type, allowing for files to masquerade as other types and potentially confusing the user, or worse.

## File Directories
A directory (also known as a **folder**) is a special type of files which records information about other files, as well as possibly other folders. The folder consists of a set of entries, each containing the name of a file followed by access information. There are several methods to choose from when implementing file directories in the global file system.

### Tree-Structured Hierarchy
This organizes folders into a collection where every directory points to zero or more files and/or directories at a lower level, and every file and directory has at least one parent directory which points to it (except for the root directory). The **root**, therefore, is the highest-level of the directory hierarchy. Every file and folder has a unique ID, which is assigned and used by the FS for management purposes. This ID is not visible to the user; instead, the user is able to direct the FS to manage files and folders by referencing an arbitrary path name. Path names can be **absolute**, which start at the root directory and drill all the way down to the desired file or folder. Paths can also be **relative** references, where the folder or file is located relative to the current directory. The FS defines syntax conventions to be able to delimit the start and end of a file or folder name, as well as to be able to navigate up one level in the hierarchy.

### Directed Acyclic Structures

### Symbolically Linked Graph

## Directory Operations
