# File Systems cont.
April 21, 2022

## Implementing File Directories
Files are physically stored on disk storage, not in directories. Rather, the directories contain information about the file, such as the size, type, location on disk, protections/permissions, and use.  These attributes can be stored in the file directory, but this can become very long, slowing down the system. A **file control block (FCB)** is a data structure which can store all of this information, and the file directory instead contains a pointer to the FCB for each file. In Unix, the FCB is called an *i*-node.

The file system must be able to search directories for a filename, find and allocate space for new files, free space when files are deleted, and change filenames. There are several approaches to organizing files and directories:
- File directories are implemented as arrays of fixed-length elements. The benefit is that each entry is the same size, so allocating, freeing, and finding a file is easy. A drawback is that all file names have a maximum length.
- Directories are implemented as arrays of variable-length entries. Files can be found by following the length properties of each entry. However, changing a filename requires freeing the current element's space and allocating new space with the updated properties, and deleting a file requires defragmentation.
- Expanding on the above option, variable-length entries also contain two pointers: one to the beginning of the entry and one at the end. Changing a file name requires only changing the value of the 2nd pointer.

## Operations
## Disk Block Allocation
