# Data Operations: Buffering, Caching, Scheduling, and Errors
April 28, 2022

## Buffers
Data generated by a producer process or an input device is typically held in a **buffer**, which is typically implemented as a register or space in main memory. A consumer process or output device can access the buffer to utilize the stored data, and free it from the buffer for the producer to fill it again. The main purpose of a single buffer is to decouple producers and consumers linked by time. Thus, producers and consumers do not need to be active at the same time for data to be processed. As well, buffers may accumulate multiple producer data and allow the consumer to use multiple data sources at once.

### Buffer Swapping
Utilizing a single buffer, a consumer will be blocked by waiting for the producer to fill the buffer. As well, the producer must wait for the consumer to empty the buffer once the producer has presented its generated data.

Buffer swapping allows producer and consumer processes to overlap by using two buffers. A producer fills buffer 1 while the consumer empties buffer 2, and the processes switch to the other buffer when both operations terminate.

### Circular Buffers
If producers and consumers are reading and writing data at the same constant rate, a single buffer may be used. The buffer can be implemented as a simple fixed array of buffer slots. This arrangement only works if the producer and consumer can work in tandem - if a producer is filling the buffer faster than the consumer can empty it, a circular buffer will begin to overwrite unread data. Thus, if a producer is writing data in faster bursts, or a consumer is reading at a coarser granularity, the corresponding process must be told to wait if there are insufficient buffer slots to read or write.

## Disk Block Caching
Modern disk controllers use an internal cache to hold the most recently accessed blocks. As well, the OS can maintain another larger cache in main memory. Thus, the **disk block cache** is a set of buffers which contain the most recently accessed disk blocks. Since the caches can contain many blocks, hashing is used to organize blocks into lists for faster access. Categories are used to further increase the performance of these caches - blocks which are critical to the system are kept in a Locked list and are resident at all times, whereas a least-recently-used policy may be used to keep a number of blocks in the cache according to their frequency of use.

This illustrates multiple uses for buffers. Some buffers are used to produce and consume data efficiently, whereas some buffers are used for facilitating faster access to data via caching.

## Disk Scheduling
## Error Handling
