# COMP 522 - Embedded Applications

Suggested texts:
- An Embedded Software Primer - Simon
- Fundamentals of Embedded Software with the ARM Cortex-M3 - Lewis
- Computers as Components: Principles of Embedded Computer Systems (Wolf)
- Arduino Workshop (Boxall)

None of these texts are required; in lieu, a microcontroller kit and light add'l hardware is required:
- Arduino UNO kit
- Breadboard
- Resistors and jumper wires
- A push button or similar input sensor

An embedded system is any type of computer system used in a product that is "not a computer."  Though desktops, laptops, tablets, phones, etc. contain "embedded" technologies, these are not considered embedded systems. Essentially, an embedded system is a product on which a conventional operating system can not be installed - it must be compiled directly to the device.

What are the major components of a motherboard?
- Microprocessor/CPU
- RAM
- Oscillator/Crystal
- I/O pins
- Power supply
- Battery (for CMOS)
- Maybe storage
- Communication ports (serial, parallel, USB, Ethernet)

When a motherboard is powered on, a BIOS (board input/output system) is loaded from EPROM/EEPROM . A BIOS is a very small piece of software used to initialize the I/O of the motherboard. An oscillating crystal is continuously powered by a small lithium battery which pulses at a very high frequency. It also keeps "boot code" stored in the EEPROM. Upon a power reset event, the first line of the boot code starts to run. This boot code is extremely basic and its main task is to invokes the BIOS. Typically, the last task of the BIOS is to identify the configured bootable storage device. This is assigned by an I/O port address and can be a SCSI drive, a USB drive, etc. 

From the bootable storage, the boot sector is loaded. This boot sector also contains a map of the drive. The disk operating system (DOS) is then accessed from the boot sector and DOS loads the operating system if installed. On embedded systems, there is no operating system, so DOS plays a much bigger role than on modern computers.

Review: https://neosmart.net/wiki/mbr-boot-process/

## FPGAs and ASICs
Field-programmable gate arrays are digital sequential logic chips which perform a task using only hardware. Application-specific integrated circuits are "hard-wired" to perform a specific task, while an FPGA might be able to be re-programmed to perform different tasks.

## Characteristics of an embedded system
Transducers are used to take a physical condition, such as a temperature, brightness, pressure, speed, etc. and convert it into an electronic signal. Audio interfaces can transduce a sound wave into a digital signal. As well, A/D converters take an analog input and translate it to a digital form.

Any embedded platform will have some version of transducers or A/D convertors, likely in many different specialized processors

Commonly, embedded systems are developed due to a need for:
- real-time response
- high reliability
- Hardware/firmware controlled by manufacturer
- Dedicated functions

Embedded systems are commonly constructed out of 8/16/32-bit microcontrollers/microprocessors. Most embedded systems also contain memory, displays, and perhaps some form of storage.

Most embedded systems do NOT contain hard disks, monitors, drives, peripherals, or network connections.

## Developing applications
In a software environment, a compiler will create object files and link them together, along with any other run-time libraries or assembled modules, with a linker into an executable program. This is loaded by a loader into RAM, where an operating system has also been loaded by a boot process.

An embedded application is developed in a similar way; however, a linker takes compiled objects, assembled code, and a real-time kernel and creates an executable, which is located and stored onto flash EPROM memory.

Microcontrollers are often distinguished from microprocessor boards by their capabilities - microcontrollers such as the Arduino can be extended via "shields" which add specific capabilities to the system.