# Subspaces
October 11, 2021

The concepts here will solidify the meaning of numbers associated with matrices, like the rank and kernel.

## Linear Subspaces
A subset $W$ of $\Reals^n$ is called a linear subspace of $\Reals^n$ if it has the following three properties:
- $W$ contains the zero vector $\vec{0}$ in $\Reals^n$ ($W \ne \empty$)
- $W$ is closed under addition: the vector sum of any two vectors $\vec{w_1}$ and $\vec{w_2}$ in $W$ must also be in $W$
- $W$ is closed under scalar multiplication: for vector $\vec{w}$ in $W$ and any scalar $k$, $k\vec{w}$ must also be in $W$

The closure properties are equivalent to W being closed under linear combinations.

The empty set technically satisfies conditions two and three, but since it doesn't contain the zero vector, it is not a proper subspace. The zero vector itself, however, is indeed a valid subspace of $\Reals^n$ which contains only the zero vector: {$\vec{0}$}.

The kernel of a linear transformation $T: \Reals^n \rightarrow \Reals^m$ is a linear subspace of $\Reals^n$.

The image of a linear transformation $T: \Reals^n \rightarrow \Reals^m$ is a linear subspace of $\Reals^m$.

If S= list of vectors in R^n then the span of S span(S) is a subspace of R^n. If S = empty then hte span(S) = { zero vec }. As well, the orthogonal list S^perp is the set of all vectors v in R^n such that v dot x = 0 for all x in S; S^perp is then a subspace of R^n

## Non-subspaces
As mentioned, the empty set is not a subspace. As well, in one dimension, a single point is not a subspace of R^1 (does not contain the zero vector), and [0, inf) is not a subspace of R^1 either (does not satisfy closed multiplication). A line, plane, etc. in R^n is a subspace only if it passes through the origin (the zero vector).

## Redundant vectors
A vector in a list of vectors is redundant if it is a linear combination of any of the *previous* vectors in the list. If none of the vectors in the list are redundant, then they are **linearly independent**.

## Basis
Vectors in a list are the basis of a subspace V if they are linearly indepenedent and they for the span of V.

## Linear relations