# Introduction to Linear Spaces
October 25, 2021

Consider the set F(R, R) of all functions from R to R (i.e. the space of all functions of real numbers). We are familiar with common algebra:
- (f + g)(x) = f(x) + g(x)
- (cf)(x) = c * f(x)

We can also consider sub-spaces of this wider functional space such as differentials:
$$
f''(x) = -f(x)
$$

There are two solutions: sin(x) and cos(x).

If f1(x) and f(x) x are solutions, then f(x) = f1(x) + f2(x) is also a solution. Similarly, if f(x) is a solution and k is a scalar, then (kf)(x) is also a solution.

# Linear space
A linear space is a set, V, endowed with two operations: addition (if v1, v2 are in V, so is v1+v2) and scalar multiplication (if v is in V and c is in R, then cvis also in V), satisfying the following conditions:
- addition is commutative: for all v1, v2 in V, v1 + v2 = v2 + v1
- addition is associative: for all v1, v2, v3 in V, (v1 + v2) + v3 = v1 + (v2 + v3)
- zero element (neutral element): there exists 0v in V such that, for all v in V, v + 0v = v
- additive inverse: for each v in V there exists v' such that v + v' = 0v.
- scalar multiplcation is associative and distributive
- scalar addition is distributive
- multiplcation by 1: for all v in V, 1v = v

Some consequences of these axioms:
There is a unique zero vector in V: 0 = 0v
There is a unique additive inverse

## Examples of linear spaces
A sequence is an ordered list of real numbers. The set of all sequences of real numbers is a vector space. We can verify this by testing the set of sequences against the 8 axioms.

P[t] is the set of all polynomials in the variable t, p(t) = a_0 + a_1t + a_2t^2 + ... + a_nt^n. We can again prove the linear space of polynomials of t by testing againt the 8 axioms.

For matrices, the set M(n, m) of all matrices of size n x m has addition and multiplcation by scalars properties as introduced previously. The zero element is the matrix of all elements equal to 0.

## Subspaces
A subset W of a linear space V is called a subspace of V if:
- W contains the zero element 0 of V
- W is closed under addition
- W is closed under scalar multiplication

This is no different from our previous definition of a subspace.

Examples:
- Diagonal n x n matrices are a subspace of M(n,n)
- Upper triangular n x n matrices are a subspace of M(n,n)
- Smooth functions C^inf(a, b) is a subspace of F((a, b) , R)