# August 30, 2021
# Introduction to Linear Systems

Linear Algebra is all about solving systems of linear equations. Equations will always be in powers of 1. For example, Bezier curves are linear systems used in AutoCAD. Some systems will have infinite solutions, and some will have no solutions. We will cover strategies for solving these systems.

A simple example is the equation $3x = 2$, where x = $\frac{2}{3}$

For an equation with two variables x and y, we must strategize. One method is to assign a definite value to one variable, and solve. If the remaining unknown variable changes depending on the value of the assigned variable, the equation may have infinite solutions. Example: 3x + 6y = 7

In systems with two equations and two unknown variables, we can use substitution, isolating one variable in one equation and substituting the resulting equation into the 2nd equation. For instance, 2x + y = 1 and -x - 2y = 1.

## Leontiff matrices
Suppose we have a very small economy consisting of just two industries X and Y. The consumer demand is $600 for X and $1300 for Y. The total output from both X and Y cannot simply meet the demand - there may be extraneous costs involved in supporting the demand.

Let us say that $1 of output from X requires $1/3 from itself and $1/5 from Y. $1 of Y-output requires $1/2 from Y and $1/4 from X. We can thus write the following equations:

x = 1/3x + 1/4y + 600
y = 1/5x + 1/2y + 1300

We can set this up as a system of linear equations:
2/3x - 1/4y = 600
1/2y - 1/5x = 1300

## Interpolation
Find the graph of a polynomial f(t) = a + bt + ct^2 which goes through a set of points (1, -1), (2, 3) and (3, 11). Thus:
f(1) = a + b(1) + c(1)^2 = -1
f(2) = a + b(2) + c(2)^2 = 3
f(3) = a + b(3) + c(3)^2 = 11

Simplify:
a + b + c = 1
a + 2b + 4c = 3
a + 3b + 9c = 11

If we subtract the first equation from E2 and E3, we are left with:
a + b + c = 1
b + 3c = 2
2b + 8c = 10

Subtracting 2E2 from E3, we're left with:
a + b + c = 1
b + 3c = 2
2c = 6

From E3:
c = 3

Sub c = 3 into E2:
b + 3(3) = 2
b = -7

Sub both b and c into E1:
a + (-7) + 3 = 1
a = 5

Thus, the polynomial is:
f(t) = 3t^2 - 7t + 5
