# Introduction + Sets
January 25, 2022

## What is a Set?

A set is a collection of "objects" - each element of the set is delimited by commas and contained within curly brackets. The elements don't necessarily need to be of the same type, but related sets are very common.

Duplicate entries in a set are disregarded, as the objects are considered "copies" of an original object. Thus, $\{1, 2, 3\}$ is equal to $\{2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 2, 3, 2\}$. As well, order is not a factor in determining equality: $\{ 1, 2, 3\}$ is equal to $\{3, 2, 1\}$. We will almost always use sets in their simplest form.

Sets are represented by a capital letter, and elements of the set are represented by a lower-case letter. The easiest way to notate a set is to list the elements, but this isn't always possible - consider a set of 1000 elements. Ellipses are used to specify a intuitive series. As well, **set-builder notation** can be used to describe sets in logical terms, such as $D = \{x \vert x \gt 2 \}$; all elements "x" such that "x" is greater than 2.

Common sets include:
- $\mathbb{N}$, the set of natural numbers
- $\mathbb{Z}$, the set of all integers
- $\mathbb{Z}+$, the set of all positive integers
- $\mathbb{Q}$, the set of rational numbers
- $\mathbb{R}$, the set of real numbers

The universal set $\mathbb{U}$ is the set which contains all elements of any other given set - in other words, the set to which all elements of a set belong.

The empty set, also called the null set, is the set with zero elements in it and is denoted by $\emptyset$. Sets can contain other sets, even the empty set.

## Subsets
If all the elements of a set are contained in another set, then it can be said that the first set is a subset of the second. Any set is also a subset of itself! As well, the empty set is always a subset of any given set, and any given set is a subset of the universal set of everything.

A proper subset is a set with a length that is less than the length of its containing set. For example, if $S = \{0, 1, 2, 3\}$, then $T = \{0, 1\}$ is a proper subset of $S$ (whereas $R = \{0, 1, 2, 3\}$ is a subset of S, but not a proper subset since $R = S$).

These relationships are defined as follows:
$$
S \sube S \\
R \sube S \\
S \not \sub S \\
R \not \subset S \\
T \sub S \\
S \sub \mathbb{U} \\
\empty \sube S
$$

## Cardinality
Cardinality refers to the number of elements in a set. It is denoted by two vertical lines:
$$ 
S = \{0, 1, 2, 3\} \\
\vert S \vert = 4
$$

## Power Sets
A power set is all possible subsets of a given set. If the cardinality of a set is n, then the cardinality of the power set is $2^{n}$. For example, given the set $S = \{0, 1\}$, the possible subsets are:

- $\empty$
- $\{0\}$
- $\{1\}$
- $\{0, 1\}$

Thus, the power set of $S$ is:
$$
P(S) = \{\{\}, \{0\}, \{1\}, \{0, 1\}\} \\
\vert P(S)\vert = 2^{\vert S\vert} = 2^2 = 4
$$

Note that every power set contains at least the empty set and the set itself.