# Set Operations and Properties cont.
February 2, 2022

## Review

### Union properties

$$
\begin{align}
\text{Identity law: }A \cup \emptyset &= A \\
\text{Domination law: }A \cup \mathbb{U} &= \mathbb{U} \\
\text{Idempotent law: }A \cup A &= A \\
\text{Commutative law: }A \cup B &= B \cup A \\
\text{Associative law: }A \cup (B \cup C) &= (A \cup B) \cup C \\
\end{align}
$$

### Intersection properties

$$
\text{Identity law: }A \cap \mathbb{U} = A \\
\text{Domination law: }A \cap \emptyset = \emptyset \\
\text{Idempotent law: }A \cap A = A \\
\text{Commutative law: }A \cap B = B \cap A \\
\text{Associative law: }A \cap (B \cap C) = (A \cap B) \cap C \\
$$

### Distribution
$$
A \cup (B \cap C) = (A \cup B) \cap (A \cup C) \\
A \cap (B \cup C) = (A \cap B) \cup (A \cap C)
$$

### Other Operations

**Disjoint sets** are two or more sets whose intersection is the empty set:

$$
\text{Sets A and B are disjoint } \rightarrow A \cap B = \emptyset
$$

**Complement sets** is the set of all elements which are not in a given set:

$$
\overline{A} = \mathbb{U} - A
$$

**Complement properties:**

$$
\overline{\overline{A}} = A \\
A \cup \overline{A} = \mathbb{U} \\
A \cap \overline{A} = \emptyset
 $$

**Difference** of two sets is the intersection of all elements in one set which are not in another set:

$$
A - B = A \cap \overline{B} = A \cap (\mathbb{U} - B)
$$

**Symmetric difference** is the set of elements which is in either set, but not both (exclusive-or):

$$
A \oplus B = (A \cup B) - (A \cap B) 
$$


### Set Identities
Identities are the basic laws on which set operations are formed. Logical equivalencies include:
- Unions &cup; &rightarrow; logical OR &or;
- Intersections &cap; &rightarrow; logical AND &and;
- &empty; &rightarrow; boolean FALSE
- &Uopf; &rightarrow; boolean TRUE

DeMorgan's Law provides an alternative way of stating the complement of a union or intersection set:

$$
\overline{A \cap B} = \overline{A}\cup\overline{B} \\
\overline{A \cup B} = \overline{A}\cap\overline{B}
$$

## Intro to Proofs
How can we show that two sets are equal? How can we prove it? We can use a Venn diagram to visualize a set statement. We can also use induction and the identity rules (represented by their logical equivalencies) to reach either a derivation or a contradiction.

How can we prove the following?

$$ A \cap B = B - (B - A)
$$

Using a series of simple rules, we can derive the left part of the equation above:

$$
= B - (B \cap \overline{A}) \text{ (definition of difference)} \\
= B \cap \overline{(B \cap \overline{A})} \text{ (definition of difference)} \\
= B \cap (\overline{B} \cup \overline{\overline{A}}) \text{ (DeMorgan's law)} \\
= B \cap (\overline{B} \cup A) \text{ (Complementation law)} \\
= (B \cap \overline{B}) \cup (B \cap A) \text{ (Distributive law)} \\
= \emptyset \cup (B \cap A) \text{ (Complement law)} \\
= B \cap A \text{ (Identity law)} \\
= A \cap B \text{ (Commutative law)}
$$

In this class, we will rarely go beyond using the simple identities in proofs. Equivalencies can also involve proving one set is a subset of the other, and vice-versa, but that will be reserved for COMP 310.

## Computer Representation of Sets
Let $\mathbb{U}$ be the alphabet. Then we can use bits to declare if each element is in the set:

- Vowels in the alphabet:
```
abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz
10001000100000100000100000
```

- Consonants:
```
abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz
01110111011111011111011111
```

We can use bitwise operations OR and AND to represent unions and intersections, respectively:
- Union (&cup;) / OR (&or;):
```
10001000100000100000100000
01110111011111011111011111
11111111111111111111111111
```
- Intersection (&cap;) / AND (&and;):
```
10001000100000100000100000
01110111011111011111011111
00000000000000000000000000
```