# Summations and Loops
February 15, 2022

To review:
Some infinite series summations can converge to a specific number. For instance consider the following:

$$
\sum_{i = 1}^n i \\
= 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5 + ... + n \\
= \frac{n(n+1)}{2}
$$

$$
\sum_{i = 10}^n 1 \\
= 1 + 1 + 1 + 1 + ... + n \\
= n - 10 + 1
$$

Given the above, we must be careful not to mix up these very common patterns:

$$
\sum_{i = 0}^n 1 \not = \sum_{i = 1}^n 1 \\
n + 1 \not = n \\
\space \\
\sum_{i = 0}^n i = \sum_{i = 1}^n i \\
0 + 1 + 2 + 3 + ... + n = 1 + 2 + 3 + ... + n \\
\frac{n(n+1)}{2} = \frac{n(n+1)}{2}
$$

## Runtime
Consider the following pseudocode:

```
for (i = 1; i <= n; i++) {
    print "Hello";
}
```

How many times does this run? This will, of course, print "Hello" *n*-times. Since a print operation is a single function, with a runtime of "1," we can say this algorithm has an asymptotic "Big O" runtime of *O(n)*, represented by the following summation:

$$
= \sum_{i = 1}^n 1
$$

Big O will be discussed later. In general, any <code>for</code>-loop can be converted to a sigma summation, and vice versa. The initial condition for the loop's interator becomes the lower limit of the sum, and the upper bound statement in the second part of the loop declaration corresponds to the upper bound of the sum. The body of the loop in the operation immediately following the sigma declaration.

In a loop, increments can increase by any value. A loop may increment using addition or multiplication. This can also be written as a sum. In a loop which increments by a value other than one, such as <code>i = i + c</code>, the loop is written with the upper bound of $\frac{n}{c}$ where $c$ is the increment amount. Similarly, a multiplicative iteration condition such as <code>i = ci</code>, the loop can be written with an upper bound of $\log_c n$ where c is the scalar multiplier of the iterator variable.

Lets combine the above concepts:
```
for (i = 1; i <= n; i = 7i) {
    for (j = 1; j <= n; j = j + 11) {
        print "hi!";
        print "hi!";
        print "hi!";
        print "hi!";
    }
}
```

The equivalent sum is written as:

$$
\sum_{i = 1}^{\log_7n}\sum_{j = 1}^{\frac{n}{11}}4 \\
=\sum_{i = 1}^{\log_7n}4\sum_{j = 1}^{\frac{n}{11}}1 \\
= \sum_{i = 1}^{\log_7n}4\frac{n}{11} \\
4\frac{n}{11}\sum_{i = 1}^{\log_7n}1 \\
= \frac{4}{11}n\log_7n
$$