# Summations & Loops + Intro to Proofs
February 17, 2022

To review, runtime of a program or algorithm can be exactly computed based on the operations performed. Any combination of loops can be computed based on the number of elements iterated on over the course of the loop, considered as a summation.

## More Loop Examples
Given the following pseudocode:

```
for (i = 1; i <= 5n + 5; i = 3i) {
    for (j = 1; j <= 1; j++) {
        for k = 1; k <= n^2; k= k + 9) {
            print "Hi!";
            print "Hi!";
            print "Hi!";
            print "Hi!";
        }
    }
}
```

What will be the structure of this summation? Each iteration of each loop adds to the index, so this is a sum of a sum of a sum. The outer loop has a lower bound of 1, and an upper bound of $log_3(5n + 7)$. The second loop has a lower bound of 1 and an upper bound of i. The inner most loop has a lower bound of 1 and an upper bound of n^2/9. Each print statement has a runtime of 1, so 4 in total.

So, we have the equation:

$$
\sum_{i = 1}^{log_3(5n + 7)}\sum_{j = 1}^{i}\sum_{k = 1}^{\frac{n^2}{9}}4 \\
\space \\
= \frac{4}{9}n^2\frac{(log_3(5n + 7)(log_3(5n + 7) + 1)}{2} \\
\space \\
= \frac{2}{9}n^2[log^2_3(5n+7) + log_3(5n + 7)]
$$

Consider the following:

```
for (i = 1; i <= n + n; i++) {
    print "Hi!";
    print "Hi!";
    for (j = 1; j <= n; j++) {
        print "Hi!";
    }
    Print "Hi!"; 
}
```

Is this also a sum of a sum? It follows a slightly different structure:

$$
\sum_{i = 1}^n(2 + (\sum_{j = 1}^n1) + 1) \\
\space \\
= \sum_{i = 1}^n(3 + \sum_{j = 1}^n1) \\
\space \\
= \sum_{i = 1}^n(3 + n) \\
\space \\
= (3 + n)\sum_{i = 1}^n1 \\
\space \\
= (3 + n)n = 3n + n^2
$$

Remember, in summation notation, the lower bound must always be less than or equal to the upper bound. Thus, loop conditions where the index variable is decreasing must be converted to increasing conditions before writing a summation:

```
for (i = n; i >= 1; i--) {
    print "Hi!;
}
```

<code>i</code> is initialized to a value greater than the lower bound of the loop, and decreases, so we must consider it as an incremental sum:

$$
\sum_{i = 1}^n1 = n
$$

Thus, if your concern is just the runtime of the loop, the loop conditions of the following is the same as the code above!

```
for (i = 1; i <= n; i++) {
    print "Hi!;
}
```

More practice:
```
for (i = 1; i <= 12; i++) {
    print "Hi!;
    for (j = 1; j <= n; j++) {
        print "Hi!;
        print "Hi!;
    }
    for (k = 1; k <= n; k++) {
        print "Hi!;
    }
}
t = 1;
while (t <= n) {
    print "Hi!";
    for (l = 1; l < n; l++>) {
        print "Hi!";
    }
}
```

This can be considered the sum of a sum plus another sum, plus the sum of a sum:

$$
\sum \space_1(\sum\space_2 + \sum\space_3) + \sum\space_4\sum\space_5\rightarrow \\
\space \\
\sum_{i = 1}^{12}(1 + \sum_{j=1}^n2 + \sum_{j=1}^n1) + \sum_{t=1}^n(1 + \sum_{l=1}^n1) \\
\space \\
= 12(3n + 1) + (n + 1)n
$$

The quiz on this material will consist of solving summations, as well as analyzing code and writing a summation, then solving that summation.

## Proofs
We already have plenty of experience in reality, as well as our coursework, with proofs. Oral proofs are common in every day life, and algorithm problems with test cases are also forms of proofs. Essentially, a proof is just the a stated problem and the presentation of a universal true solution.

A proof is a valid argument which establishes the truth of a theorem. Statements in a proof includes axioms (universal truths), premises, and previously proved theorems. Rules of inference and definitions of terms are used to draw intermediate conclusions on the way to the final conclusion.

### Conditionals
A conditional consists of two statements in the form of *if p then q.* The shorthand way of writing this statement is $p \rightarrow q$. A direct proof of a conditional assumes that *p* is true, then uses axioms, inference, and other established truths to show that *q* is also true. The goal is to show that there is no possible case where *p* is true and *q* is false.

Let's look at an example:
If $n$ is even, then $2n + 8$ is even.
Is this always true?

$$
\text{Let }p = \text{"}n\text{ is even"}, q = \text{"}2n + 8\text{ is even"} \\
p\rightarrow n = 2k, (\forall k)k \in \mathbb{Z} \\
\space \\
q = 2n + 8 \\
= 2(2k) + 8 \\
=2(2k + 4) \\
\space \\
2(2k + 4)\in\mathbb{Z}\rightarrow (2k + 4) \in \mathbb{Z} \rightarrow 2k \in \mathbb{Z} \land 4\in\mathbb{Z} \\
\therefore p\rightarrow q
$$