# Quiz 1 Review
February 3, 2022

## Topics on Quiz
- what is a set  
- set builder notation  
- empty set 
- set equality 
- subset / proper subset  
- set cardinality 
- power set 
- cartesian product 
- all set operations (union, - intersection, ...)  
- Venn diagram  
- Inclusion Exclusion Principle

## Sample Quiz

1. Let A = {v, w, x, y, z}. Which of the following statements are true?
>- &emptyset; &sub; A &times; A : **TRUE**
>- &emptyset; &in; A : **FALSE**
>- &emptyset; &sube; A &times; A : **TRUE**
>- &emptyset; &sube; A : **TRUE**

2. Let A = {v, w, x, y, z}. Which of the following statements are true?
>- {x, y} &in; P(A) &times; P(A) : **FALSE**
>- (x, y) &in; P(A) &times; P(A) : **FALSE**
>- {x}, {y} &in; P(A) &times; P(A) : **FALSE**
>- ({y}, {x}) &in; P(A) &times; P(A) : **TRUE**

3. U = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} is the universal set. A = {1, 5}, B = {3, 4, 2}, C = {2, 5}. List all elements of (B &cup; A) - (C &cap; A), in ascending order.
>B &cup; A = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}
>C &cap; A = {5}
>(B &cup; A) - (C &cap; A) = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} - {5} = {1, 2, 3, 4}

4. List the elements of the set {t &in; Z &vert; t<sup>2</sup> &le; 10} in ascending order:
>{-3, -2, -1, 0, 1, 2, 3}

5. U = {1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10} is the universe, A = { 2, 3, 8, 9 }, B = { 1, 7, 10 }, C = { 2, 4, 10 }. List all the elements of LaTeX: \left(\left(B\cap C\right)\cup A\right)^C

6. U = {1, 2, 3, 4} in the universal set. A = {2, 4}, B = {2, 3}, C = {2, 3, 4}. Which of the following is B &times; C?
- {(2, 3), (2, 3, 4)} : **FALSE**
- {(2, 3), (2, 4), (3, 2), (3, 4)} : **FALSE**
- (2, 2), (2, 3), (2, 4), (3, 2), (3, 3), (3, 4) : **FALSE**
- {(2, 2), (2, 3), (2, 4), (3, 2), (3, 3), (3, 4)}  : **TRUE**
- {(2, 2), (3, 3), (4, 4), (2, 3), (3, 2), (2, 4), (4, 2), (3, 4), (4, 3)}  : **FALSE**

7. Which of the following are possible value for &\left|A\times B\right|=?$, where $A$ and $B$ are sets:
- 0  : **TRUE**
- 8  : **TRUE**
- 3  : **TRUE**
- 11  : **TRUE**
- 16  : **TRUE**

8. U = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} is the universe, A = { 2, 4 }, B = { 2, 3 }, C = { 2, 3, 5 }. Evaluate $\left|P\left(C\right)\right|\cdot\left|A\times B\right|=?$:
>|P(C)| = 2<sup>3</sup> = 8
>|A &times; B| = 2 * 2 = 4
>8 * 4 = 32

9. U = {1,2,3,1,5,6} is the universe, A = { 1, 3 }, B = { 1, 2 }, C = { 1, 5, 1, 6 }. List all the elements of $A-\overline{B}$:
>{1, 3} - {3, 5, 6} = {1}

10. Let A={v,w,x,y,z}. Which of the following statements are true:

LaTeX: \left\{\varnothing\right\}\subset P\left(A\right)
LaTeX: \left\{\varnothing\right\}\subseteq P\left(A\right)
LaTeX: \varnothing\subseteq P\left(A\right)
LaTeX: \varnothing\subset P\left(A\right)

11. Let A={v,w,x,y,z}. Which of the following statements are true. (select all that are true). 
 LaTeX: \left\{v\right\}\in P\left(A\right)
LaTeX: v\in A
LaTeX: \left\{\left\{v\right\}\right\}\in P\left(A\right)
LaTeX: v\in P\left(A\right)

12.   U = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} is the universe, A = { 2, 4 }, B = { 2, 3 }, C = { 2, 3, 5 }. Evaluate LaTeX: \left|P\left(B\times C\right)\right|=?
>64

13. U = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} is the universal set, A = { }, B = { 1, 4 }, C = { 4, 5, 2 }. List all the elements of LaTeX: \left(B\cup A\right)\oplus\left(A\cup C\right) . 

14. U = {1, 2, 3, 4, 2, 3, 4} is the universe, A = { 3, 4 }, B = { 1, 2 }, C = { 4, 2, 1, 3 } . List all the elements of LaTeX: C^C-\left(A\cup B\right).   

15.  Let A={v,w,x,y,z}. Which of the following statements are true. (select all that are true).

LaTeX: \left|P\left(A\right)\right|=2^{\left|A\right|}
LaTeX: \left|P\left(A\right)\right|=\left|A\right|^2
LaTeX: \left|P\left(A\right)\right|=5
LaTeX: \left|P\left(A\right)\right|=16
LaTeX: \left|P\left(A\right)\right|=32

16.  Let A={v,w,x,y,z}. Which of the following statements are true. (select all that are true).

LaTeX: \left\{x\right\}\subset P\left(A\right)
LaTeX: \left\{\left\{x\right\}\right\}\subseteq P\left(A\right)
LaTeX: \left\{x\right\}\subseteq P\left(A\right)
LaTeX: \left\{\left\{x\right\}\right\}\in P\left(A\right)

17. U = {1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10} is the universe, A = { 2, 3, 8, 9}, B = { 1, 7, 10 }, C = { 2, 4, 10 }. List all the elements of LaTeX: B\cap\left(C\cup A\right)

18.  Let A={v,w,x,y,z}. Which of the following statements are true. (select all that are true).
Group of answer choices
LaTeX: \left\{w,y\right\}\in A\times A
LaTeX: \left(y,w\right)\in A\times A
LaTeX: \left\{y,w\right\}\in A\times A
LaTeX: \left(w,y\right)\in A\times A

19. Choose what the * should be from the answers (may have more than one answer)

Let A be a set 

LaTeX: \left(A\times\varnothing\right)\ast P\left(A\right)  

LaTeX: \subseteq 
none
LaTeX: \subset 
LaTeX: \in 

20. If for some sets A and B we have that 

LaTeX: \left|P\left(A\right)\right|-\left|P\left(B\right)\right|=0

then which of the following statements are correct. (might be more than one answer)

|A| = 0 and |B| = 0
none
|A| - |B|=0
A=B
|A|=|B|

21.  Choose what the * should be from the answers (may have more than one answer)

LaTeX: \left\{1,2,3\right\}\ast\left\{1,2,3,\varnothing\left\{\varnothing,1,2,3\right\}\right\}
Group of answer choices
LaTeX: \subseteq 
LaTeX: \in 
none
LaTeX: \subset 

22. Choose what the * should be from the answers (may have more than one answer)

Let A be a set

LaTeX: \left(A\times A\right)\ast P\left(A\right)
Group of answer choices
LaTeX: \subseteq 
LaTeX: \subset 
LaTeX: \in 
none

23. Choose what the * should be from the answers (may have more than one answer)

LaTeX: \left\{1,2,3\right\}\ast\left\{\varnothing,1,2,\left\{1,2,3\right\},3\right\}
Group of answer choices
LaTeX: \subseteq 
none
LaTeX: \in 
LaTeX: \subset 

24. Choose what the * should be from the answers (may have more than one answer)

LaTeX: \left\{2\right\}\ast\left\{1,\left\{1,2\right\}\right\}
Group of answer choices
none
LaTeX: \in
LaTeX: \subset 
LaTeX: \subseteq 

25. Choose what the * should be from the answers (may have more than one answer)

Let A be any set

LaTeX: \varnothing\ast P\left(A\right)

none
LaTeX: \subset 
LaTeX: \in 
LaTeX: \subseteq 

26. Let A = {{∅, 1, 2, 3, 4}} and B = {{{∅}, 2, 4}, 6}. Choose the correct answer. What is the cardinality of A x B.

27.  True or false: LaTeX: \left(A\times B=\varnothing\right)\Longrightarrow\left(B=\varnothing\right) 

28. LaTeX: \left(A\subseteq B\:and\:B-A=\varnothing\right)\Longrightarrow\left(A=B\right)  

29: LaTeX: \left(A-B=B-A\right)\Longrightarrow\left(A=\varnothing\:and\:B=\varnothing\right)   

30.  LaTeX: \left(B=\varnothing\right)\Longrightarrow\left(A\times B=\varnothing\right)

31. There are sets A and B with the following cardinalities. 

|U| = 54,

|A| = 16,

|B| = 23,

|(A∩B)C|=42,

What is |A∪B|?