# Sequences and Summations
February 8, 2022


In computer science, a sequence is often represented by ann array. We can compute a runtime efficiency for operations on the sequence based on the number of elements in the sequence, usually denoted by *n*. Summations of a sequence of numbers can be achieved by a simple *for* loop.

## Sequences
In computer science, a sequence is often represented by ann array. We can compute a runtime efficiency for operations on the sequence based on the number of elements in the sequence, usually denoted by *n*. Sequences are similar to sets, in that they are a list of elements, but sequences are listed in a distinct order and can contain duplicates as well. For instance, there is a different between the **set** $S'$ and the **sequence** $S$:

$$
S = \{1, 2, 3, 0, 1, 2, 3\} \ne S' = \{0, 1, 2, 3\}
$$

An element in a sequence may be referred to an index in the array, using the notation $S_i$ given the element's $i-th$ position in the sequence. Sequences can be thought of as functions from a subset of $\mathbb{Z}$ to a set $S$. The index of an element is the domain, and the element is the image.

For example, the equation $a_n = 3n$ represents terms $a_1, a_2, a_3, a_4, ...$ in a sequence of $\\{a_n\\} = \\{3, 6, 9, 12, ...\\}$.

### Geometric and Arithmetic Sequences
Sequences can be profiled based on how they scale and grow in element values as the dequence progresses. An arithmetic sequence grows by a constant amount, such as with $a_n = 3n$. The formula to calculate the $n-th$ term $a_n$ with a constant difference $d$ is:

$$
a_n = a_1 + (n - 1)(d)
$$

Likewise, geometric sequences grow by a constant *factor,* such as for $b_n = 2^n$. The associated formula for the $n-th$ term $b_n$ with a constant ratio $r$ is:

$$
b_n = b_1r^n
$$

Sequences can also be neither arithmetic, nor geometric. Consider the Fibonacci sequence $F_n = F_{n-1} + F_{n - 2}$. As the sequence grows, the ratio between successive elements approaches $\frac{\sqrt{5} + 1}{2} = \phi = 1.618933989$, called the golden ratio.

### Determining the Sequence Formula
When determining a formulaic description of a sequence, it helps to consider the following:

- Is it an arithmetic progression (each term a constant amount from the last)?  
- Is  it  a  geometric  progression  (each  term  a  factor  of the previous term)?
- Does the sequence repeat (or cycle)?
- Does the sequence combine previous terms?
- Are there runs of the same value?

The following are common sequences:
n2 = 1, 4, 9, 16, 25, 36, ...
• n3 = 1, 8, 27, 64, 125, 216, ...
• n4 = 1, 16, 81, 256, 625, 1296, ...
• 2n = 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, ...
• 3n = 3, 9, 27, 81, 243, 729, ...
• n! = 1, 2, 6, 24, 120, 720, ...

## Summations
The sum of a sequence is called a series. An iterator $j$ is defined and initialized, along with an upper limit $n$:

$$
\sum^{n}_{j = m}a_j = a_m + a_{m + 1} + a_{m + 2} + ... + a_{n - 2} + a_{n - 1} + a_n
$$

For arithmetic and geometric sequences, there are formulas to use rather than computing each element and summing them up:

$$
\begin{align}
\text{For }a\ne1&: \\
\sum^n_{k=0} k &= \frac{n(n + 1)}{2} \\
\sum^n_{k=0} k^2 &= \frac{n(n + 1)(2n + 1)}{6} \\
\sum^n_{k=0} k^3 &= \frac{n^2(n + 1)^2}{4} \\
\sum^n_{k=0} k^4 &= \frac{n(n + 1)(2n + 1)(3n^2 + 3n - 1)}{30} \\
\space \\
\text{For }\vert a\vert \lt 1&: \\
\sum^{\Inf}_{k=0} a^k &= \frac{1}{1 - a} \\
\sum^{\infin}_{k=0} ka^k &= \frac{a}{(1 - a)^2} \\
\sum^{\infin}_{k=0} k^2a^k &= \frac{a^2 + a}{(1 - a)^3} \\
\end{align}
$$

A summation is equivalent to a <code>for</code>-loop in programming. Starting with an interator valiable and an initial value, we repeatedly perform a task until an upper bound is reached. For instance, the sum 

$$
\sum_{j=m}^n a_j
$$

...is equivalent to:

```
int sum = 0;
for (int j = m; j <= n; j++) {
    sum += a(j);
}
return sum;
```

Likewise, a double sigma sum is equivalent to a nested <code>for</code>-loop.