# Permutations and Combinations
March 15, 2022

Both combinations and permutations are ways to count possibilities, or ways of arrangement. The difference is whether the order of arrangement is considered.

## Permutations
Consider a poker hand of Ad, 5h, 7c, 10s, Ks - is this the same hand as Ks, 10s, 7c, 5h, Ad?

Usually, in the game of poker, this is the same hand. If the order of the cards DID matter though, we would consider this a permutation of the cards.

A permutation is an ordered arranegment of elements of a given set. Consider the set $S = \\{a, b, c\\}$: $c, b, a$ is a different permutation from $a, b, c$. An $r$-permutation is an ordered arrangement of $r$ elements from the set. 

To calculate a permutation, commonly notated as $P(n, r)$, divide the factorial of the cardinality of the set by the factorial of the *difference* of the cardinality of the set and the cardinality of the selected elements:

$$
P(n, r) = n(n-1)(n-2)...(n-r+1) \\
= \frac{n!}{(n-r)!} \\
= \prod^n_{n-r+1} i \\
\space \\
P(52, 5) = \frac{52!}{(52-5)!} \\
= \frac{52!}{47!}
= 52 \cdot 51 \cdot 50 \cdot 49 \cdot 48 \\
= 311875200
$$

## Combinations
Consider a bit string of length 10. How many of them contain exactly four 1's in the string?

Since the 1's are not unique elements, we may consider $1_11_21_31_4000000$ and $1_21_11_31_4000000$ as the same string. Thus, we are no longer dealing with a unique arrangement, and cannot use the permutation formula. Instead, we consider this a combination, caluclated as the following:

$$
C(n, r) = \frac{n!}{(n-r)!r!}
$$

In our bit string example, it is calculated as follows:

$$
C(10, 4) = \frac{10!}{(10-4)!4!} \\
\space \\
= \frac{10!}{6!4!} \\
\space \\
= \frac{10 \cdot 9 \cdot 8 \cdot 7}{4 \cdot 3 \cdot 2 \cdot 1} \\
\space \\
= 5 \cdot 3 \cdot 2 \cdot 7 \\
=210
$$

What if we were to consider a bit string which contains *at most* four 1's? This considers a sum of a number of combinations: the case where the string contains zero 1's, plus the case where the string contains one 1, up to four 1's:

$$
C(10,0) + C(10,1) + C(10,2) + C(10,3) + C(10,4) \\
= \frac{10!}{10!0!} + \frac{10!}{9!1!} + \frac{10!}{8!2!} + \frac{10!}{7!3!} + \frac{10!}{6!4!}
$$