# Integers and Division
March 5, 2022

A big portion of computer science uses modular arithmetic (usually signified by the $\%$ operator) and the idea is centered around the concept of division (or more specifically, remainders). As integers cannot be divided into smaller decimal units, remainders in integer division are common.

## A New Division Operator
To specify when an integer **evenly** divides another integer, we can use the bar operator. $3\space\vert\space12$ reads as 3 divides 12. Likewise, we can denote that an integer is **not evenly** divisible using a negation such as $a\not{\vert}\space b$ .

This gives us a few theories:
- if $a\vert b$ and $a\vert c$, then $a\vert (b+c)$
- if $a\vert b$, then $a\vert bc$ for all integers $c$
- if $a\vert b$ and $b\vert c$, then $a\vert c$

Proof of the first theory:
$$
\begin{align}
a \vert b &\rightarrow \exists j \in \Bbb{Z}, b = a\cdot j \\ 
a \vert c &\rightarrow \exists k \in \Bbb{Z}, c = a\cdot k \\
b+c &= aj + ak = a(j + k) \\
b+c &= a(j + k) \rightarrow a \vert (b+c) \\
\end{align}
$$
## The Division Algorithm
Let $a$ be an integer and $d$ be a positive integer. Then, there are unique integers $q$ and $r$, with $0 \le r \lt d$, such that $a = dq+r$. In common terms, $d$ is the divisor, $a$ is a dividend, $q$ is a quotient, and $r$ is a remainder.

We can then define two operators:
- $q = a \text{ div } d$
- $r = a \mod d$

According to convention, when considering the modulo of an integer by another integer, we consider the maximum multiple case for the divisor. For instance, $19\mod 4 = 19-4(4) = 3$.

Note that the remainder must be greater than zero. So, $(-11) \mod 3 = -11 - (-4)(3) = 1$.

## Prime Numbers
A positive integer $p$ is prime if the only positive factors of $p$ are $1$ and $p$. If there are other factors, it is a composite number. Note that $1$ is not prime, or composite for that matter.

The **Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic** states that every positive integer greater than one can be uniquely written as a prime, or as the product of two or more primes, where the prime factors are written in order of non-decreasing value. Here are some examples:
- $100 = 2\cdot 2\cdot 5\cdot 5$
- $182 = 2\cdot 7\cdot 13$
- $28 = 2\cdot 2\cdot 7$ 

This is called **prime factorization**. Every integer has a unique prime factorization.

How do we check if a very large number is prime? For instance, is $1234973$ prime or not? We have a theory that will help: if $n$ is a composite integer, then $n$ has a prime divisor $p$ where $p\le\sqrt{n}$. Lets check this theory - is $113$ prime or composite?:
$$
\begin{align}
\sqrt{113} &\approx 10.x, 0\le x\lt \infty \\
p \le\sqrt{113}&\rightarrow p\in \{2, 3, 5, 7\}: \\
2 &\not{\vert}\space 113 \\
3 &\not{\vert}\space 113 \\
5 &\not{\vert}\space 113 \\
7 &\not{\vert}\space 113 \rightarrow \\
113&\text{ is a prime}
\end{align}
$$
## Euclid's Theorem
According to Euclid, there are infinitely many prime numbers. Let's try to prove this using contradiction: assume that there is a finite number of primes.

Let $p$ equal the hypothetical finite set of primes:
$$
\begin{align}
\text{Let }p &= \{p_1, p_2, p_3, ..., p_n\} \\
\text{Let }q &= p_1p_2...p_n+1 \rightarrow\text{q is prime }
\end{align}
$$
## Greatest Common Divisor
The greatest common divisor of two integers $a$ and $b$ is the largest integer $d$ such that $d\vert a$ and $d\vert b$. This is denoted by $\gcd(a, b)$:

$$
\gcd(a,b) = p_1^{\min(a_1, b_1)}p_2^{\min(a_2, b_2)}...p_n^{\min(a_n, b_n)}
$$
What is $\gcd(120, 500)$?
$$
\begin{align}
120 &= 2^33^15^1,\space 500 = 2^23^05^3 \\
\gcd(120,500) &= 2^{\min(3, 2)}3^{\min(1, 0)}5^{\min(1, 3)} \\
&=2^23^05^1 \\
&=20
\end{align}
$$
## Relative Primes
Two numbers are relatively prime if they have no common factors other than $1$. In other words, the numbers are relatively prime if their only common factor is $1$. Note that each number does not have to be prime - for instance, $gcd(25,39) = 1$, even though $25$ and $39$ are clearly not prime. Note also that a composite and a prime are not always relatively prime - consider $13$ and $26$: $gcd(13,26) = 13 \ne 1$.

## Least Common Multiple
The least common multiple of positive integers $a$ and $b$ is the smallest positive integer that is divisible by both $a$ and $b$. This is denoted by $\text{lcm}(a, b)$:

$$
\text{lcm}(a,b) = p_1^{\max(a_1, b_1)}p_2^{\max(a_2, b_2)}...p_n^{\max(a_n, b_n)}
$$
What is $\text{lcm}(95256, 432)$?

$$
\begin{align}
95256 &= 2^33^57^2,\space
432 = 2^43^3\rightarrow \\
\text{lcm}(95256,432) &= 2^{\max(3, 4)}3^{\max(5, 3)}7^{\max(2, 0)} \\
&= 2^43^57^2 \\
&= 190512
\end{align}
$$