# Formal Analysis of Art
An art object is considered to be constructed of two components: the form, and the content. A formal analysis of an artwork deals with the aspects of form of an artwork. Formal elements include:
- line
- shape
- color and light (or absence of)
- texture
- spatial qualities (space, volume, mass)
- composition (balance, rhythm, proportion, scale, emphasis)
- perspective
- materials/media

A complete formal analysis considers how each element of the artistic composition contributes to the overall impression made by the work The first part of formal analysis is a description of the art as it appears. This description is an overall explanation of the piece as if one does not have visual access to the work. The second part is more analytical, and interprets the work through the artist's use of formal element of language.

## Lines
A line has many different properties:
- Thin/thick
- Parallel/perpendicular
- Diagonal/vertical
- Smooth/jagged
- Curvy/straight

Lines can describe an emotion or feeling without using textual language.

## Shapes
Shapes come in regular and irregular forms and are constructed whenever a line deviates or meets another line. Regular shapes are typically geometric in nature and include polygons. Irregular shapes are organic or biomorphic and are not easily described in geometric terms. A shape is a two-dimensional visual entity whereas a volume is a three-dimensional entity. Circles are often considered as a "perfect form" and, along with triangles, are frequently seen in religious art.

## Color
Color is described using hue and value. Hue is the property of a color which describes the wavelength of the color. Value describes the lightness or darkness of a hue. The color spectrum can be divided into warm and cool colors. They can also be divided into primary, secondary, and tertiary colors in which secondary colors are derived from mixing primary colors, and so on. Interpretation of color can be culturally specific - for instance, red can be symbolic of danger, but in Lunar New Year red is associated with luck or good fortune.

## Texture

## Spatial qualities

## Composition

## Perspective
Perspective is considered in terms of the pictorial depth, or illusion of, of an artwork. Generally perspective describes the depiction of 3-D space in a 2-D plane. Techniques include overlapping, diminution, atmosphere, divergent/orthogonal, and linear/Renaissance perspectives.

