# Why We Make Art: Food and Shelter
## Securing the Food Supply

Shown: Hall of Bulls, Lascaux

In viewing the above work, we can see a lot of curved lines, bold outlines, and organic shapes. We can assume that the lines were laid using charcoal, while pigment and coloration is provided by the natural tint of the rock as well as applied pigment. The artists had to use materials that were available immediately in nature. Colors are thus restricted to organic earthtones but still complement the drawings well.

The orientation and scale of the animals offers insight into a possible hierarchy among the animals. The animals could be submitting to the larger buffalo/bovine on the right, but it could also be an exhaltation or celebration of the animal in comparison to the rest.

We see the bodies of the animals presented in a single plane, however on also all the animals we can see two horns on their heads. This is called a "twisted perspective," in that perspectives are seemingly combined to offer a view that is not possible in normal natural terms.

Why was this work created? In many prehistoric cultures, art was produced in a ritual context in order to please spirits. These artistic offerings would help to encourage beneficial weather, good hunts, and more. By paying respect to the animals, the artist may encourage the welfare of the animals so that they may continue to provide for the group.

Shown: African Rock Painting, Tassili n'Ajjer

In comparison, the above work offers some similarity but important differences as well. Both prehistoric paintings are accomplished with natural tones and colors, and share similar subjects portrayed in organic shapes. However, the African painting features human figures alongside the animal forms. This is a striking point and serves to date the work; before about 8000BCE, human forms were rarely seen in art works (paleolithic vs neolithic). We can also see that, as the eye moves left, more animals are accumulated near the humans. We can see circular shapes representing the huts where the humans live; we can deduce that this painting shows a scene of agriculture, specifically herding. The contrast between the two paintings shows a transition from hunter-gatherer societies to a more farming oriented settling culture.

Shown: Sue Coe, There is no escape

In today's modern society, few people are involved in processing or obtaining the raw materials for their food. Coe's watercolor is part of a series called "Porkopolis," and she considers herself an activist first. Her other works are deeply political and offers challenging perspectives on controversal topics. 

## Storing and Serving Food + Drink
Throughout history, vessels are constructed to store consumables, and elaborate containers have consistently been crafted to elevate the practice. 

Shown: Water Jar (Hydria), Women at the Fountain House, Greece

The process of making the vessel takes collaboration between artisans; a potter must first throw the vessel into shape and often, the neck of the pot will be spun separately from the body. They are then combined using techniques called scoring and slip (diluted clay) to rough up and glue the two pieces. Handles and feet may be added in this way as well. This hydria displays what is known as "black-figure technique," in which pigment is added to the vessel before it is fired and solidified. The pigment darkens into deep black when heat is applied. Mineral pigments are added to the slip to offer additional detail and illustration.