# Further Defining Art: Additional Terminology
We know when we analyze artworks, we want to make sure we address the formal properties, the content of the work, and the context in which it was made. Today, we will focus on additional vocabulary that will help with identifying aspects of artwork.

**Aesthetics** involves the look and feel of an artwork. It is a branch of philosophy which focuses on the idea of artistic beauty. In art, aesthetics are associated with a characteristic style of a culture, genre, artist, or movement. In Western media, aesthetics are associated with the pleasure enjoyed while experiencing an artwork. Aesthetics are not universal or objective and 

Shown: Botticelli, Birth of Venus

**Style** is considered as a set of specific recognizable attributes which are consistent and coherent in artwork within an historical period, a cultural tradition, or of an individual artist. Art is representational when it contains entities from the world in recognizable form. Naturalistic style is related in that it denotes recognizable forms as they are seen in nature. Idealized art is modified from a naturalistic style in which a form is represented in its "perfected" form as bounded by a set of aesthetics and culture norms. 

These terms are used in contrast to abstract style, in which an artist takes liberties in their representation of an object. Surreal art may contain bizarre or fantastic arrangements of images or materials, meant to tap into the unconscious mind. Expressive art communicates the artist's emotion or expression applied to the object. Non-objective art is abstraction taken to its limits, in which the object is not recognizable outside of the context of the artist's intent.

Shown: Picasso, Les Desmoiselles d'Avignon

A **cultural style** consists of recurring or distinctive features of artworks from a certain place and time.

Shown: Murakami, Kiki

An **artist's style** refers to distinguishing features of a particular artist's work.

Shown: van Gogh, Portrait of Mme. Ginoux and Gaugain, Woman in a coffeehouse

## Visual Culture
Art is a part of visual culture, the imagery that humans create which comes to us through all varieites of media. The three most referenced categories of visual culture in the United States today are fine art, popular culture, and craft.

Fine art is considered to be transcendental and produced by professional artists with unique sensibility. A fine artwork is typically among the highest of cultural achievements of Western culture and is associated with museums and galleries.

Popular art is percieved to be more accessible, commercial, or inexpensive. Pop art includes comics, movies, propaganda, and many more.

Craft often refers to specific media including ceramics, glass, jewelry, weaving, and woodworking. Craft production usually involves creating objects with intent to use them in everyday life. 