# Art and Reproduction cont.

## The promise of fertility - primordial couples
Shown: God Te Rongo and his three sons, Cook Islands

Not all fertility figures are female. This figure is carved from wood and stands 27" tall. It wasn't likely carried or held, but still used in a ritual context. The phallus is emphasized and there are three children surrounding the Te Rongo; this is how we can designate this as a fertility figure. Most scholars believe that Te Rongo is linked to a creation myth. It has never been confirmed though; because missionaries posessed and imported the figure, it was not seen as important when it was initially transported to the UK.

The head of the figure occupies nearly a quarter of the entire sculpture. The proportions of the figure reflect the importance of these symbols to the Polynesian culture.

Shown: Masaccio, Explusion of Adam and Eve

The above fresco is exemplary in that the viewer may see the progress of the artist's work, as there are clear delineations where the work was painted each day. Masaccio took direct inspiration from antiquity, as the human body is modeled after the Greco-Roman idealized form. However, this also is a transitional piece as interest in this era Eve is inspired by the Venus Pudica, a Roman figure which shows a woman covering her bare breasts and genitalia. This work is said to include one of the first pictorial representations of shadow. It is also remarkable in that the nudes are painted near the start of the Italian Renaissance, as during the Middle Ages representation of human form was typically more conservative.

Shown: Dogon Primordial Couple, Mali

On the topic of primordial couples, we can see a differnet idea of idealized beauty. This freestanding wood sculture is 29 inches tall, with two figures are of equal height, with elongated features. In contrast to the anguish and emotion from the *Expulsion*, these figures are seated upright, and seem to complement each other which may represent the dual responsibilities of man and woman. We can see that the man has one hand around the woman, touching her breast, and the other hand on his penis - this is the key gesture which marks this sculpture as a fertility piece.

## Human Couples

Shown: Jan van Eyck, Wedding Portrait

*Wedding Portrait* is said to be one of the first representations of full-length human figures in European art history. The amount of detail is extraordinary, from textures of the clothing to the reflection of the mirror in the background. van Eyck's accomplishment with oils helped to lead the transition of major art painting away from tempura - he also used emperical perspective which was rare at this time. It is hypothesized that this painting is proof and representation of the contract of marriage. Note that the woman is likely not pregnant out of wedlock - this pose and fashion was popular at the time and may signify good hopes for fertilit. To reiterate on the level of detail, van Eyck actually signed his name on the wall in the background.

Until 1563, weddings were typically performed in private, usually in the reception room or "nuptial chamber" of a house. It was interesting in that a bed was usually in this room too. In the chandelier, there is a single candle lit which represents the presence of God as a witness to the contract. The dog represents loyalty.

## Art and Procreation

Shown: Kandarya Mahadeva Temple, India

The Hindu religion celebrates sexual love - this is a very differnet representation of the body from Masaccio's fresco of Adam and Eve. Physical pleasure is seen as a virtue which may hep lead towards enlightenment.

Shown: Alice Neel, Pregnant Woman

First comes love, then comes mariage, then comes taxes...and typically, childbirth. The content of this work is significant in this context - as this was painted by a woman, the pregnant female is shown without idealization. The woman looks, stressed, exhausted, and uncomfortable. Note that the male figure is present, but barely emphasized and represented. Compare this to the *Dogon* figures in which each sex is represented at more or less the same scale.

The color is also notable - the sickly greens, yellows, and browns represent the queasiness and nausea which frequently accompanies pregnancy.