# Art and Sexuality cont. + Art and Religion

We talked about how women and pregnancy was represented in a variety of ways, not only in how the body was rendered but also with use of line, color, shape, and other formal attributes.

## Childbirth and Progeny

We last left off looking a a representation of pregnancy - we move on to the next step in the process.

Shown: Moche Pot Depicting Woman Giving Birth, Peru

This particular Moche vessel is referred to as a "stirrup-spout" - the looping piece of the pot is actually a spout, not a handle. The pot is 10-12" in height. This is interesting in a modern context - stirrups were seen in this timeframe on saddlery, bit today most women will likely encounter stirrups in a clinical environment. 

As we've seen before, slip coloring was often used in constructing these pots, but they were also painted. A woman in labor is pictured, with two midwives guiding her through the proces. We seem one holding her steady from behind as the other delivers the baby, who is just exiting the birth canal.

Shown: Henry Moore, Draped Reclining Moher and Baby

When one thinks of a common genre of a representation of a mother with their child, the *Madonna* with the child Christ frequently comes to mind. Portraits of everyday mothers with their children were not frequently painted by men. In the above scultpure, we see the artist has indicated that the figure is clothed in some way, concealing her anatomy. The artist references a mountainscape in how the top of the sculpture meanders up and down. This carries strong themes of protection and shelter. It is also interesting that the eyes and one hand are the only representational body parts observed - the eyes look out for danger and reinforces the idea of protection. Henry Moore was a modern British artist and was recognized for his abstract bronze sculptures. He frequently combined his interests in reclining figures, mothers and their children (and representations of their bodies in art), and the surrounding landscape into his works.

## Nudes in Western Culture - Recumbent Nudes

Shown: Titian, Venus of Urbino

In Western culture, sexuality is not only about intimacy and reproduction, but also carries a connotation of power dynamics. A feminist view of Western art puts most representations of the female body in the path of the male gaze.

Titian was a Venetian oil painter and was widely recognized.The *Venus* was painted for the Duke of Urbino, purely to be enjoyed visually. She is shown in idealized form holding flower petals, along with branches of myrtle in the background, indicating the figure as Venus herself. This allows a "loophole" for Titian to draw erotic art by calling it a representation of a goddess. The representation is very inviting and sexualized.

The women in the background appear to be the nude's servants, gathering her clothing. The presence of the dog indicates loyalty and fidelity. Hence, there are symbols of innocence and indications that there is nothing inappropriate happening in the scene. These were also ways in which the Duke could commission this painting without attracting accusations of perversion. 

Shown: Ingres, Grand Odalisque
Shown: Manet, Olympia

What is the attitude of the three different women to being viewed? Which of the three images is the most sexual? The most sensual? The most controversial? Why? Please analyze specific details from the paintings to support your responses to these questions.

## Dieties and Holy Beings

We just saw an artist disguising his nude work as a goddess - we'll now look into more intentional representations of divine beings. They are supernatural and not human, yet history's representation of gods are frequently anthropomorphic. Nearly every culture has an artistic representation of at least one god or diety, whether through visual art, spoken word, music, and ritual. It should be noted that many cultures, such as Judaism and Islam, do not condone a visual representation of God, who is considered unknowable.
