# Media and Deriving Meaning
Art objects can be made in professional workshops, in collaborations, or by a community. They key is that, art is not restricted to individual effort - art can be produced by multiple artists of varying talent and skill. Peter Paul Rubens (17th c.) oversaw one of the largest and most productive European workshops, employing over 100 artists to complete his commissions.

Art objects can also see contributions from professionals outside the "art world" - for instance, 19th century Japanese woodblock prints are often credited to the artist who creates the visual scene, but sees contributions from the block carver, the paper maker, and the printer.

## Media
A medium refers to the material substance, as well as the substrate, used to make a work of art. Common surface media used in 2-D art include paper, wood, and canvas. 

## Drawing
Drawing is defined as mark-making by use of friction against a substrate by a medium.

Dry drawing media include:
- pencil
- charcoal
- chalk
- crayon or pastel

Ink is the most common form of wet drawing media, whether applied by pen, marker, or fine brush.

Artists are not restricted to artisically functional media and are free to choose almost any material for their creations. 

Shown: Cai Guo-Qiang, Drawing for Transient Rainbow

## Printmaking
There are many different printmaking techniques, such as:
- relief
- intaglio
- lithography
- serigraphy (silkscreens)

Materials for supporting a print are widely varied, from using a printing plate or press to transfer the artwork onto a paper, to using stencils, to carving blocks from rubber, wood, or stone. In relief printing, material is removed from a block to create negative space in the print. Ink is applied to higher areas and can be transferred to a substrate such as paper. Intaglio is a little more complicated - characterized by highly detailed fine lines and rich dark tones. Tools or chemicals are used to cut an image into a surface. Common techniques include engraving, etching, and aquatint.

Shown: Durer, some dude on a horse

Lithographs are produced by applying an oil pencil drawing on a stone slab (usually limestone). Oil-based paint is inked onto the stone, which adheres to the oil drawing.

Screen printing is perhaps the most popular printmaking process. A stencil is placed over a stretched finely-woven fabric, such as silk, and ink is "squeegeed" through the screen to be deposited on a sufrace below the screen setup. Common surfaces for silkscreening include posters and clothing.

## Painting
Painting media consists of two major components: pigment and binders. Pigments are created by grinding materials into vivid powdered colors. Pigments are blended into a binder in order to hold pigment to a surface (such as paper, wood, canvas, etc) as it dries.

Encaustic media are one of the oldest forms of paint, consisting of pigments blended into hot beeswax.

Fresco is typically used for large murals painted on walls. Forms include *secco* where paint is applied to a dry plaster wall, and *buon fresco* where paint is appied to a wet plaster wall, which allows for the paint to be absorbed permanently as the plaster dries.

Tempera paint involves mixing pigment into egg yolk. It is characteristically matte in sheen and dries quickly. It was traditionally used until oil painting developed in the 1500s. It is very translucent and must be applied in layers.  Watercolor paints are suspended in gum arabic, which is water-soluable. Gouache is similar to common watercolors except that pigment is suspended in white chalk. Acrylic and oil are perhaps the most popular binder substrates in use today.