# Methods and Media cont. + Why We Make Art (Food)

## Painting cont.
Acrylic paints are suspended in a synthetic polymer and dries quickly in a flexible film finish. They are massively produced for the commerical market and provide an affordable and accessible medium. 

## Fabrics, Needlework, and Weaving
There are many different art objects which fall under this category, and offers a transition from 2-d to 3-d art including:
- Tapestries, large woven artworks created for diplay
- Quilts, pieces of fabric stitched together by needle and thread
- Embroidery, elaborate stitching in patterns and decoration

Shown: Faith Ringgold, The Bitter Nest, Part II

## Three-dimensional Art
**Freestanding sculptures** are objects meant to be observed from all sides, said to be "modeled in the round."

Shown: Maoi Statue, Easter Island, Polynesia

Conversely, **relief sculptures** are carved *into* a flat surface, and are only meant to be observed directly. The depth of carving is referred to as *bas relief* and *haute relief*.

Shown: Relief carving, Cambodia

Carving is a subtractive process where artists remove material from stone, wood, or synthetics to create a 3-d work.

Shown: Raharuhi Rukupo

Modeling is an additive process where malleable material is manipulated and built-up to create a form. Clay is capable of very fine detail.

Shown: Eagle Knight, Aztec

Modeled sculptures can be cast in metal or in plaster. For large bronze works, the lost wax casting method can be used where a thin layer of wax is suspended between two molds, and is melted out by molten metal. This process produces a hollow metal sculpture with thin walls.

Sculptures may be **assembled** with components. This allows for an assembled work to consist of multiple kinda of materials. 

Shown: Nimba, Goddess of Fertility, Guinea

**Assemblage** refers to incorporating found objects into a work.

Shown: Joseph Cornell, Suzy's Sun

**Fabricated sculpture** uses industrial or commercial processes to realize a concept. Electronics, welding, and other materials may be used in these works.

Shown: Nam June Paik, Electronic Superhighway

**Installations** are mixed media artworks designed for a particular location or space (i.e. site-specific). Artists must take the environment and existing architecture into account when creating an installation.

Shown: Gianlorenzo Bernini, Ecstacy of St. Teresa, Cornaro Chapel

**Performance** involves using the human body in a live-action event staged as an artwork. The experience is temporally restricted which makes

Shown: Suzanne Lacy and Leslie Labowitz, In Mourning and in Rage (photo)

Technology-based media is evolving at a rapid pace - this includes AI-generated art as well as art that involves using technical tools, such as **photography** where a light-sensitive surface is exposed to light through a lens to create an image. The modern printed photograph evolved from what is known as a daguerrotype, which had a toxic creation process using iodine, silver, and mercury. Today, the image creation process has been digitized in which light-detecting diodes are used to capture image information.

**Cibachrome** prints use a polyester base instead of paper, producing vivid face-resistant colors with high detail and allowing for image at a massive scale.

Shown: Andreas Gursky, 99 Cent

**Moving images** are referred to as video or film, depending on the media used. In either case, they are constructed as a sequence of photographs or still images, which are presented as a projected session or loop. Moving images may include an audio element, creating a multi-sensory temporary experience.

## Food and Shelter
Food as a subject of art will be studied in 

line, shape, color, composition with emphasis on the rendering of the animals. Include a couplkeof sentences articulating an overarching mood or message communicated through the form