# Internet Message Control Protocol (ICMP)
October 12, 2022

### Note: Presentations and Exam 2:
Presentations are due October 26 (topic: **WiFi v6**). Exam study guide available covering all of exam 1 + IP connectionless datagram delivery and ICMP (through chapter 9 in textbook)

One thing about the IP structure mentioned last time is that errors can happen (such as discarded datagrams by the router or TTL timeout, and the transport layer is in charge of making the connection more reliable if needed. There is also the need for error detection and discovery, as well as debugging, which is not provided directly by IP. 

## ICMP
ICMP messages are divided into two categories: error reporting and query messages. Error reporting messages report problems that a router or host might encounter when IP packets are processed. A query message occurs in a pair, which helps a host or network manager get specific info from a host.

ICMP messages are encapsulated in IP data, which itself is encapsulated along with an IP header into a datagram frame. A general format for ICMP datagrams start with 8 bits for a type, 8 bits for a code, and 16 bits for a checksum. Then, 32 bits are reserved for a header. The data of the ICMP message follows immediately after. Types denote a block of codes, which are reused among different types (i.e. type 3 code 3 (port unreachable) is not the same code as type 5 code 3 (redirect datagram for TOS and Host)).

ICMP always reports error messages to the original source. Thus, any host in between the client and the destination is not aware of the ICMP message. Common error reporting include 'destination-unreachable,' 'source-quench,' 'time-exceeded', 'parameter-problem', 'redirection,' 'echo-request,' 'echo-reply', 'timestamp'

Destination-unreachable indicates the end of the line (last router) has been reached and the destination address cannot be found. This ICMP message includes the original sent IP header as well as the first 8 bytes of the IP data (in addition to type, code, and checksum sections - header is not used and is zeroed-out).

Source-quench messages are meant to inform the source that it is sending messages too fast for the router to process, due to congestion or otherwise, and that the source must slow the rate of datagram transmission. This message carries the same format as the destination-unreachable message.

Time-exceeded occurs when the TTL has timed out, and the code indicates where the packet was dropped. Code 0 indicates the TTL running out at a router, and code 1 is used only by a destination host to show that not all fragments have arrived within the required time. The host can then alter its parameters (additional number of hops or more TTL) to make the next transmission more successful. Again, this message carries the same format as before.

Parameter-problem messages are created by a router or destination and indicate that one of the fields of the IP datagram are badly formed or incorrect. In this message, a pointer to the location of the error in the datagram is included in the ICMP header. 

Redirection messages are used to augment a host's routing table, as more routes are discovered and specified. These messages are used to update the router's originally small routing table and build knowledge of the network. Thes messages are structured similarly to the aforementioned, however the header contains the target IP address.

Echo requests and replies can be sent by either a host or router (like the ping command) and are used simply to echo either a request (type 8) or reply (type 0). This message contains optional data. These are used by network managers to check the operation of the IP. Timestamp requests and replies can be used to calculate the round trip time between a source and the destination, even if their clocks are not synced. 