# Intro to Networking + The Data Link Layer
September 7, 2022

The Internet is a collection of free technologies comprised of applications, built on a variety of protocols, designed to be implemented by a wide range of hardware. Manufacturers are continually coming up with new hardware tech, and the protocols must remain stable in order for all hardware to remain compatible; that being said, just like with networking hardware there are improvements to protocols being developed every day as well.

The US Government realized the need for a networked system many years ago. In the 1970s, the **Defence Advanced Research Project Agency (DARPA)** began working on **ARPANet**. Network protocols began to take their current form around 1977-79, with the design of **packet switching**. As well, research was performed using radio and satellite communication for computer networking.

### Data Communication
Information comes in man forms - text, numbers, images, video, audio, etc. **Data communication** involves ways of sending and receiving that information. In general, a data communication system has 5 components:
- sender
- receiver
- message
- protocol
- transmission medium (cables, wireless, fiber, etc)

**Network protocols** provide the specifications for basic communication:
- Internet Protocol (IP)
- Transmission Control Protocol (TCP)
- User Datagram Protocol (UDP): mainly used for games
- Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP): used for debugging while setting up networks, for utilities, etc.
- address resolution pro

As well, **Application Protocols** utilize the above network protocols to arrange and categorize communication:
- HyperText Transfer Protocol (HTTP)
- Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP)
- File Transfer Protocol (FTP)
- Secure Shell (SSH)

Data flows between two devices can take the form of **simplex** (one way transfer), **half-duplex** (alternating transfer, one direction at a time), or **full-duplex** (two-way transfer).

### Networks
A **network** is defined as the interconnection of a set of communication-capable devices. A network must be performant, reliable, and secure. As well, networks can be of a physical form, or exist as a logical form.

A **physical network** is defined as the set of all hardware, cables, and connecting peripheral devices involves in communication between a set of computing devices. Common examples include **Local Area Networks (LAN)** and **Wide Area Networks (WAN)**. The major constraints of a physical network system are bandwidth capacity, scalability, and cost. LANs can be as simple as connecting two hosts in a home office. It is generally privately owned, and hosts are identified by unique local addresses. Communication between hosts carries both the source and destination addresses. WANs have a wider geographical span (town, state, country, world) and connects routers, switches, and modems. This is generally how telecommunication companies offer Internet access. There are tiers of WANs which are formed by leasing portions of a high-tier WAN to other lower-tier companies and organizations

A **logical network** is simply a virtualization of a portion of a physical network, which connects two or more logical network devices or interfaces. It is how the end user views the network, represented by software.

Networks are designed using a number of *topologies*. **Point to point** was the most common for years of the early Internet, in which two computers or nodes were directly connected using a common link. Advantages include:
- High bandwidth, since the line is only shared between two devices
- Low latency, if the devices are close together
- Simplicity and maintainability
However, this topology can only be used over a relatively small area, and the entire network depends on the link.

Another topology which was commonly used is known as the **bus topology** - a single cable with a terminator at each end connected all devices to that single cable. It's very easy to add new nodes, and node failures won't affect other nodes in the network. However, it's difficult to find errors or faults in the system, and damange to the single cable will affect the entire netowrk. As well, this topology is generally congested and slow.

The **ring topology** connects each node to one or two neighboring nodes. Data simply flows between nodes in a cycle, either unidirectionally or bidirectionally. In this topology, there are less packet collisions, and the cost in generally lower. However, it is difficult to add additional nodes, and while the network is more robust compared to the bus, damage to the links at any point has essentially a 50% chance to affect the rest of the nodes on the network.

**Star topologies** connect multiple nodes to a central device called a hub. Contrary to a point to point topology, the hub can have many connections to many other nodes. It is easy to manage, locate failure, and extend the network. It also tends to offer very high speed compared to other topologies. However, failure of a single hub will affect the entire network; redundancy must be utilized to avoid complete network failure.

A **mesh topology** connects all nodes to every other node. Each node transmits its own data as well as the data of other nodes. In this configuration, there can be no single point of failure, and it is easy to identify faults. However, it is difficult to add nodes, since they must be connected to every other node. This is generally an expensive topology which is hard to implement.

### Switching
The Internet is a *switched network* in which a **switch** device connects at least two networks together. A switch simply forwards network traffic from one network to another. Common types of switched networks include *circuit-switched networks* and *packet-switched networks*. Circuit switching involves using a physical path to dedicate a single connection between two endpoints for a session duration. **Plain old telephone service (POTS)** is an example of a circuit switched network. In contrast, a packet-switched network manages data transfer with digital *packets,* small optimized pieces of data represented in bits. Each packet is directed to its proper destination by a **router**.

### Protocol Layering
A protocol defines rules for communication between senders and receivers, as well as all intermdeditae devices. The protocol is a layered structure and there is *logical communication* between layers. There are two primary models of protocol layering: the OSI model (mostly educational, not widely used), and the TCP/IP model.

The **OSI model** is a computational model that standardizes communication without regard to underlying internal structure, with the following layers:
1. Physical: provides transmission and reception of raw data
2. Data Link: provides link between two connected nodes
3. Network: provides a means of transferring packets
4. Transport: provides a means of transferring variable length data
5. Session: Controls dialogue between nodes/hosts
6. Presentation: establishes context between application layer entities
7. Application: represents interaction in the application itself

The **TCP/IP model** is widely used across the Internet, and contains a subset of the OSI model with the same responsibilities:
1. Physical
2. Data Link
3. Network
4. Transport
5. Application

The source and destination nodes are responsible for providing the majority of layers. Network hardware may only be responsible for a physical, or physical + data link layer.

Encapsulation of layers occurs before packet is sent by the source (or intermediary devices) and decapsulation of layers occurs when packet is received by the destination (or intermediaries).

Multiplexing and demultiplexing can encapsulate a packet from several higher layer into a single protocol from the source, and decapsulate a packet into several protocols at the destination. For instance, FTP and HTTP protocols can be muxed into a TCP protocol, which can then be muxed with a UDP protocol into an IP layer.

Any communication between two devices requires two addresses, the source and the destination. Fom the TCP/IP layer perspective, the name of a device is at the application level; the port number specifies the transport layer; a logical address supplies the network layer; and finally, the data link is provided by a physical address.

### Standards
A request for comments (RFC) is a publication authored by individuals, engineering groups, or computer scientists describing a new internet specification. RFCs are numbered sequentially and every new RFC is assigned a new number. Later RFCs may render older RFCs obsolete. Any new network engineer needs to be familiar with the history of landmark RFCs. 

The **Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)** is a large group divided into 10 areas, each with its own manager. A chairman and the area managers constitute the **Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG)**. These people guide how the internet gets developed.

## Data Link Layer
On the lowest layer of the TCP/IP model, the physical layer consists of all of the tangible, actual devices, cables, etc. that make up a network. On top of that, the data link layer provides service to the network layer, and receives service from the physical layer. The Internet itself is a combination of networks glued together by connecting devices. The Data Link layer consists of two sub layers: the **logical link layer (LLC)** provides flow control, acknowledgement, and error detection; whereas **media access control (MAC)** specifies who is allowed to access the data/media.

Physical networks and devices have a unique MAC address, which is 48 bits long. MAC addresses are given in hexadecimal and provides frame sync, addressing, and mapping capabilities.

Frame synchronization determines start and stop of each frame using these methods:
- Time-based Detection expects a specified amount of time between each frame
- Character Counting tracks the count of remaining characters in the frame header
- Byte Shuffling wraps the frame with special byte sequences, such as preceeding the frame with *DLE STX* or succeeding the frame with *DLE ETX*
- Bit Shuffling marks start and end of frame with flags consisting of a special pattern

A frame is constructed of 7 sections:
- Preamble: An alternating bit pattern of 10MHz frequency and 5.6 microseconds
- Start of Frame Delimiter (SFD): a single byte indicating the start of the frame information
- Source Address: The source MAC address
- Destination Address: The destination MAC address
- Type
- Payload
- Frame Check Sequence (FCS): Provides a method for error checking

Addressing types include:
- Unicast: used to send data over single hop between source and destination; the 2nd digit of the first byte must be an odd number
- Multicast: used to send same data to multiple destination clients in the network; the 2nd digit of the first byte must be even
- Broadcast: used when data must be sent to all devices on the LAN; byte must be 0xFF (i.e. FF : FF : FF : FF : FF : FF)

Mapping involves deciding where a message is sent, assigning a connection between an Internet Address (IP) to a hardware address (MAC). Routing decisions can be handled for a packet by a router, using either manual mapping or an Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) which is defined beforehand to handle the translation.

### Ethernet
Ethernet was invented by Xerox in 1976, standardized by IEEE in 1978, and is still in use today. Most ethernet cable today is known as 10 base T (Twisted Pair), though fibre optic Ethernet now exists at the consumer level for widely separated hubs. "Thick" and "thin" Ethernet also exists, though these early iterations are much less common today.

### Address Resolution Protocol
RFC 826 defines an address resolution protocol (ARP) as a mapping of a given Network layer address (such as an IP address) to a Data Link layer address (the MAC address). As a packet moves from its source to its destination, the ARP may translate an IP to a MAC address at any point along its journey, as well as at the very end of the path. Direct mapping and dynamic mapping are two main methods used for ARPs.

**Direct mapping** assumes a 1-to-1 translation of one address to another, which is efficient and easy to understand but can break down quickly with a large number of connecting devices and hosts. On the other hand, **dynamic mapping** is more complex to implement but allows for devices and hosts to automatically become informed of address changes when they occur. This requires hardware to broadcast these changes; nonetheless, this is the current standard for address resolution on the Internet.

ARP requests can be cached to avoid resolving a request for every IP packet. These cache entries essentially form a lookup table, providing a very fast reference for known addresses, but are limited by their dynamic nature and must be set to expire to keep synced with current mappings.