## Blues cont.
January 26, 2022

To review - blue notes are characteristic of jazz, where notes are stylized with glissando, ghosting, and other methods rather than playing every note straight.

## Blues cont.
Record companies started to realize that recordings of black female blues singers were a very profitable product, and the blues experienced a revival in the 1920's, particularly indicated with the success of singer Bessie Smith. Queen Latifah recently produced an HBO special on Smith. The was a lot of controversy surrounding her death, at a young age of 43 in 1937. Her boyfriend was driving a car and lost control of the vehicle after falling asleep at the wheel. The car collided with a truck and Smith suffered critical injury to the right side of her body. John Hammond, a jazz writer and producer, told the story that Smith was denied admission to a hospital based on her race, and by the time she was able to be taken to a Black-friendly hospital, she had lost too much blood to recover. Now discredited, the true story was that Smith was taken to a black hospital initially, where her right arm was amputated. She died later this morning.

Blues songs are commonly written in 4/4 time, with a repeating 12-bar pattern, with a 1-4-5 chord progression and an A-A-B-A lyric pattern. "Empty Bed Blues" by Smith is exemplary of this style.

WC Handy is another big name from the blues era. A trumpet player from the early 1900's, he is most known for *popularizing* the blues and bringing it to wider audiences. His touring band was steeped in more of a Western concert style, but Handy would see blues musicians playing while out on his travels. He would later publish many blues musicians and even wrote at least two standards, "Saint Louis Blues" and "The Memphis Blues." He called himself the "father of the blues."

Handy and another composer, Harry Pace, met in 1912 and shortly thereafter founded the Pace & Handy Publishing Company. They published mainly sheet music, and when Pace predicted that the phonograph would make inroads into the American household, he resigned after Handy refused to change their business model. Pace established Black Swan records in 1921, which sought out Black talent and published a huge number of Black artists' recordings. In 1923, the business failed and Pace sold Black Swan to Paramount Records in 1924.