# Ragtime
January 31, 2022

## Review questions
What are blue notes? 
What was the blues contribution to the birth of jazz? 
What is the blues lyric form? 
What is the most common form of the blues? 
Who had the epithet “Empress of the Blues”? 
What famous jazz musician did Bessie Smith record with in 1924 on her recording of St. Louis Blues? 
What was Bessie Smith’s breakthrough recording in 1923? 
What was the controversy surrounding Bessie’s death? 
Who created/invented the blues? 
Who was considered the first musician to write and publish blues songs? 
What was the most covered song in the first half of the 20th century? 
Who had the epithet “Father of the Blues”? 
What was Black Swan? 
Who formed Black Swan? 
What do “Treemonisha” and the “Maple Leaf Rag” have in common?

## Ragtime and syncopation
Syncopation is a key characteristic of ragtime. Most music of the era would center on binary points of the 4-beat measure - either 1 and 3, or 2 and 4. Syncopation is a specific emphasis on different beats of the measure. It was not a new concept but ragtime did become known for the concept. One of the best known ragtime composers was named Scott Joplin, a piano player who also wrote America's first known folk operas, called Treemonisha. He had composed another opera prior to this called A Guest of Honor (about black leader Booker T. Washington’s dinner at the White House with President Roosevelt), however, while on tour, someone stole the box-offices receipts and Joplin, unable to pay the performers lodging was stripped of all his possessions, including the music. It was never recovered. He died in 1917 of syphilis, the same year as the first jazz recording. Ragtime, and particularly Joplin's work, was made popular again in 1973 in a movie called The Sting.

## Polyphony in concert band
From Sousa's march, we can hear a lot of different phrases happening all at once. The piccolo has a crazy trilly part, the high brass carry the main melody, and the low brass play a syncopated bas part. This style of arrangement would be iconic in the development of jazz. Early dixieland jazz would take a similar instrumentation, explemplary with Joe "King" Oliver's "Dippermouth Blues."