# Armstrong's Hot 5
February 14, 2020

## Birth of Scat Singing
It is commonly said that Armstrong's "Heebie Jeebies" was the origin of vocal sound improvisation - legend says that Armstrong dropped the lyric sheet on the floor and proceeded to fill the missing lyrics with scat sounds. The practice of "scat" was already known by other names in the New Orleans scene, but Armstrong is considered the "father of scat."

Armstrong, with pianist Earl Hines among others, formed a group in Chicago called the Hot 5. They played together until 1928 when he moved back to New York to perform on Black Broadway. His most known song, "Ain't Misbehavin'," was performed in this time and marked the beginning of his commerical success. After 1930, his influence in jazz petered out as the genre began to evolve towards bebop and Armstrong held strong to his classic Dixieland roots. Despite this, In 1964, The Beatles were dominating the pop charts - at one time, they had all 10 spots on the Billboard Top 10 charts. Armstrong beat them to number 1 with his song "Hello, Dolly!"

## Earl Hines (1903-1983) (piano)


## Review Questions
Louis Armstrong had one rival that was considered to be his equal. He plays the clarinet and soprano saxophone. On our listening test he’s playing the only band rendition of Maple Leaf Rag.
- Sidney Bechet

Joe King Oliver was a mentor to whom? 
- Louis Armstrong

This recording on our listening test is considered a perfect example of the New Orleans style. 
- Joe "King" Oliver and his Creole Jazz Band - "Dippermouth Blues"

What is scat singing and who invented this art form?
- Louis Armstrong
  
What was the name of Louis Armstrong’s group in Chicago in the late 20s and which recording is on our 
listening test?
- Louis Armstrong and his Hot Five - "West End Blues"
  
Who is considered the most influential jazz musician of the 20s?
- Louis Armstrong
  
What musician spent time in prison while working in Europe?
- Sidney Bechet

This artist was featured in the Woody Allen movie “Midnight in Paris. 
- Sidney Bechet

Where did Louis Armstrong meet his second wife. What is her name and what was her profession?
- He met Lil Hardin, a piano player, while playing in Joe "King" Oliver's band

What is "trumpet style" piano?
- Earl Hines developed this method of piano, with a more linear note-based style of playing as compared to a chordal-style. 