# Jelly Roll Morton + "Cool" Jazz
February 16, 2022

Many other artists existed in the orbit of Armstrong's massive popularity and influence.

## Jelly Roll Morton (1890 - 1941) (piano)

Born Ferdinand Joseph Lamothe, he was a legendary performer as well as a composer and band leader. He started his playing career in Storyville, but left NOLA in 1912 to travel around the US, as well as Canada and Mexico. He had many other unsavory jobs before making it on music alone, but showed dedication by studying compliation with Scott Joplin for the last 10 years of Joplin's life, in New York from 1907 to 1917. Jelly Roll wanted to take ragtime music to a new level, and Armstrong said too that "Joplin was the principle source of Morton's ideas." He recorded a version of "Maple Leaf Rag," taking the strict feel of the ragtime version and "relaxing" it. Many of his arrangements combined this structure of ragtime with the improvisation of jazz, and wrote breaks, interludes and choruses into his compositions. Some critics and historians say this set the stage for big band.

He received a telegram from the Melrose Publishing Co. in 1923 offering $3,000 for the rights to his song "Wolverine Blues." He took the deal and went to Chicago, where much of his historical career took place. He formed the Red-Hot Peppers band there in 1926. He was one of the first jazz composers to write down his arrangements, and many of his compositions have become part of the classic jazz repertory. He was known to have a huge ego, and had a surly reputation. Morton said in a letter to Downbeat Magazine in 1938: “It is evidently known, beyond contradiction, that New Orleans is the cradle of jazz, and I myself happened to be the creator”  The letter is signed, “Jelly Roll Morton, Originator of Jazz and Stomps, Victor Recording Artist, World’s Greatest Hot Tune Writer.”

The Great Depression marked the end of his recording career. From 1930 onwards, his 1923 collaboration "King Porter Stomp" with Porter King and Joplin was the only major source of his fame. He suffered a stab wound at The Music Box, a DC bar which he managed, in 1938. After being refused care at a whites-only hospital, and receiving sub-standard treatment for his wounds at the Black hospital, he failed to recover fully and was often short of breath. He died in Los Angeles in 1941.

## Bix Beiderbecke (1903-1931)
Bix was widely known as the greatest white jazz soloist - his short life garnered admiration by African American jazz crowds but was marked by rampant alcoholism.

He was heavily influenced by the recordings of the Original Dixieland Jazz Band, Armstrong, New Orleans Rhythm Kings, and Joe Oliver. He never learned to read music, but was a prodigious listener and could start playing by ear at the age of 3. He taught himself the cornet while studying piano, though his parents did not approve of his music endeavors. In 1921, he was sent to the Lake Forest Military Academy aganst his wish to become a jazz musician - nevertheless, he was in proximity to Chicago and would sneak out to go hang out at the Friar's Inn. He received some work in 1922 after convincing his father to let him try a music career, but lost some opportunities because of his illiteracy. After working boat tours and dance bands in Michigan and Wisconsin, he returned to Chicago to join a touring band called the Royal Harmonists of Indiana. Bix had the opportunity to join Armstrong to play in private, but would not be able to record or perform due to segregation.