# Characteristics of Jazz
February 2, 2022

Jazz is a combination of influences. African Americans contributed immensely with traditions of blues, spirituals, and work songs. The rhythms and improvisations of these styles, along with tonality and phrasing, are categorically African. Western European music contributed a sort of framework, providing instrumentation, form, harmony concepts, and polyphony.

Jazz typically has a set of characteristics:
1. Improvisation - the ability to compose and perform at the ssame time. It is an essential element of jazz solos, where melody is still important but ornaments or embellishments are equally important.
2. Rhythm - The swing associated with jazz is unique - however, not all jazz styles swing. Syncopation is inherent in a swing.
3. Distinctive voices - players develop their own style and repertoire
4. Melody - Blue notes and inflections (bending, vibrato, ghost notes, fake tones, growls)
5. Spontaneity - Arrangements of form and harmony are given, but most of what is played is not written down

## Birth of Jazz
New Orleans is widely considered the birthplace of jazz. Jazz existed in many parts of the world, but it was especially prevalent in NOLA. There are a number of reasons for the establishment of New Orleans as the capitol of the genre.

### Congo Square
In 1817, the New Orleans City Council established Congo Square as an official site for slaves to congregate and dance. African rituals called “ring shout” took place and “offered a precious opportunity to recover at least a little of what was lost when they were taken from their homes." Much of the rhythm in jazz could have been passed on from these dances.

### Storyville