# Whiteman Orchestra Alumni + Piano Styles
February 21, 2022

## Whiteman's Orchestra and others

### Eddie Lang (1902 - 1933) (Guitar)
While Lang did not play in Whiteman's orchestra, he was loosely affiliated through Bing Crosby. Born in Philadelphia, he is considered the first jazz guitar virtuoso. His career coincided with the development of recording techniques suited to the acoustic guitar, which partly 
through his influence supplanted the banjo as a jazz instrument.” (Grove)

"Singin' the Blues" was recorded by the Frankie Trumbauer and His Orchestra, featuring Biederbecke and Lang. He also backed Bing Crosby and was the house guitarist with Okeh records (1926-1933). Lang and Lonnie Johnson, a NOLA guitarist,  recorded some duets as well.

Lang died at a young age of 30 due to a botched tonsillectomy, reportedly the result of bad anesthesia. Crosby was particularly upset because he personally recommended that Lang undergo the procedure. 

### Paul Whiteman (1890-1967) (Violin)
Whiteman played as a classical artist with the Denver (1907) and San Francisco Symphony Orchestra (1914). He first heard jazz in 1915 in San Francisco, and left classical music about 3 years later to “make a lady out of jazz,” spawning so-called "symphonic jazz."

“While jazz purists accused him of diluting the character of early jazz for commercial purposes, less biased 
observers applauded the high polish and versatility of his orchestra” (Grove) 

He brought his orchestra east to Atlantic City in 1918, made a recording of “Whispering” and it sold 2.5 million copies, becoming the best known band leader of the 1920's. He settled in New York in 1920; later he played for the Ziegfeld Follies and landed the job at the Palais Royal nightclub on Broadway. George Gershwin premiered “Rhapsody in Blue” with Whiteman’s orchestra at the Aeolian Concert hall in New York on February 12, 1924 and was a huge success. Whiteman commissioned Gershwin to write a piece for the concert. He was billed from then on as the “King of Jazz” even though his orchestra did not really play jazz.

Ellington respected his “lofty ambitions for his music, his eye for first rate musicians, his managerial skills, and the certainty and dignity” in which he did it. Some of his musicians include Bix, Jack Teagarden, Bunny Berigan, Eddie Lang, and Tram. Bing Crosby sang with Whiteman as well (1928ish) 
 
### Frankie Trumbauer (1901 - 1956) (Sax)
Known for playing the "C Melody" sax, pitched differently than typical Bb or Eb saxes. Nicknamed "Tram," he was a test pilot in WW2. Before that, he helped to originate the "Cool Era" of jazz, along with Biederbeck, and was a huge influence on Laster Young (a later sax player). His clean light tone was characteristically different than Bechet and Hawkins. He continued music for a bit after the war, but could not keep up with bebop and died in 1956.

## Piano Styles: Stride
Taking its roots from ragtime (and even described as "eastern ragtime"), pianists in Harlem started to add more technique, speed, and improvisation to rags. Joplin wrote his ragtime music to be played at a moderate pace - Harlem threw this out the window. James P. Johnson displayed this style with his song, "The Charleston." He was considered the exemplary piano player of the 1920's, as well as the father of stride piano.

Stride served to bridge the styles of ragtime and jazz piano. Soon, stride overtook strict rag form and became very popular, particularly with "cutting contests." These contests pitted bands and individuals against each other to outplay the competition. Many cutting contests would take place at rent parties, which were all-night dances held to assist Harlem residents with cost of admission going to help tenants with rent playments. Willie "the Lion" Smith and James P. Johnson would often play these contests to a draw.

### James P. Johnson (1894 - 1955)
A prolific composer and performer, Johnson wrote 230 popular songs, 19 symphonic works, and scored 11 musicals. He cut piano rolls for the Aeolian Co. and influenced a great number of musicians through this medium, including Duke Ellington. He was also one of the first musicians to broadcast on radio. 

He is most famous for "The Charleston." His first works were recorded in 1921, and he continued recording through the years until he was partially paralyzed by a stroke in 1940. A second stroke in 1951 left him bedridden until his death.

### Art Tatum (1910 - 1956)
Arguably the most admired pianist in jazz history, he is frequently described as a virtuoso. Influenced by Johnson in his rhythmic invention, as well as technical mastery derived from Hines, he often employed stride style in the left hand with horn-like flowery right hand lines. He is most known for his solo work but also played in trios and other bands.