# Fats Waller + Boogie Woogie
February 23, 2022

## Boogie Woogie
Towards the end of the 1920's, another style of piano music became very popular going into the Depression era. With a characteristic "8 to the bar" rhythm, boogie woogie imparted a new kind of energy to popular music. The left hand controls a melodic repeating bass line with a percussive, punctuated style with bluesy right hand on top. "Honky Tonk Train Blues" by Meade Lux Lewis (1927) is a good example.

## Fats Waller (1904 - 1943) (pianist/composer)
Fats is perhaps most popular for his Broadway works, including "Ain't Misbehavin'" from the show "Hot Chocolates" which helped to catapult Armstrong's career into the entertainment industry. He was heaviliy mentored by JPJ and was indeed very proficient in stride, though he could play and compose in many other styles and also worked with Bessie Smith and Fletcher Henderson. He was known as the honorary mayor of Harlem. Longing to create concert music in the style of George Gershwin, he was held back by the racial barriers of the early 20th century. He also strived to break into the big-band scene, and had a long lasting band named "The Rhythm."

A prolific artist, he first recorded at the age of 18 with Okeh Records in 1922, with the A/B release of "Birmingham Blues" and "Muscle Shoals Blues." He frequently appeared on radio and made movie appearances, and even appeared on one of the first television broadcasts. He signed an exclusive contract with Victor in 1934, and saw great fame with tours across the US and Europe. He "ate more food, drank more liquor, and seemed to have more fun than any other musician around." Alas, this lifestyle caught up to him, and after falling ill during a show in Hollywood in 1943, he died on pneumonia, en route to New York at a train stop in Kansas City. His most well-known hits include "Honeysuckle Blues," "The Joint is Jumpin'," and "I'm Gonna Sit Right Down and Write Myself a Letter."