# Early Jazz cont.
February 7, 2022

## Review Notes
Possible songs on the listening test:
Bessie Smith - "Empty Bed Blues"
W.C. Handy - "Memphis Blues" (1912) and "St. Louis Blues" (1914)
Billie Holiday - "Fine and Mellow"
Scott Joplin - "Maple Leaf Rag" and "The Entertainer"
Joe King Oliver - "Dippermouth Blues"
Sidney Bechet - "Maple Leaf Rag"

Blues (blue notes), gospel (call & response), ragtime (syncopation), and marching band (polyphony) were four styles of music which helped Jazz to evolve.

Structure and instrumentation of jazz is European in origin, but the Black community offered the unique sound and feel.

When discussing the characteristics of jazz, the swing feel is really the only one that can be considered indigenous to jazz. If it swings, it's probably jazz.

Jazz was born in New Orleans. Other than the fact that a number of the early great jazz musicians came from 
New Orleans, historians believe a number of reasons also helped to develop jazz:
- Congo Square, where slaves could congregate and join in song
- Storyville brothels provided a lot of work opportunity

The Dixieland era of jazz (trumpet, clarinet, trombone, rhythm section) describes these first years of jazz, from the beginnings of the genre up to the start of the Swing era in the 1930's. Two distinct styles came to the forefront:
- New Orleans, where the band was felt as a "single performing body" and characterized by collective improvisation 
- Chicago, with more of an emphasis on individual solos

The Original Dixieland Jass Band, an all-white group, recorded "Livery Stable Blues," the first jazz recording in 1917. The band broke up in the late 1920's after international success.

## Early New Orleans Jazz Musicians
## Kid Ory (1886-1964)
Ory was discovered out of New Orleans by Buddy Bolden and headed out to Los Angeles early in his career as a musician and bandleader. The first Black recording was by Ory in 1921 (in either San Francisco or Los Angeles). He moved back to Chicago to be in a band with Joe King Oliver (Creole Jazz band), Jelly Roll Morton, and Louis Armstrong. Ory is credited with taking the trombone from a bass line (tail gate style) like instrument to a melodic line instrument with improvisation capabilities. Two well-known tracks by him are "Black Bottom Stomp" and "Struttin' With Some Barbecue."

### Buddy Bolden (1877-1931) (cornetist) 
Through first person accounts, Buddy was cited as being **one of the first jazz musicians**; however, there are no recordings of Buddy. Buddy led what some experts say was the first true jazz band, and was one of the first, if not the first, to bring embellishments and syncopation to the dance hall and blend it with the blues. He attended church mainly to listen to the music and gain influence from it. 1905 was his peak, though he had a short career of only 2-3 years. He was a major influence on Oliver and Armstrong.

There are no recordings of Buddy. The only mention of him in print (March 2, 1906) was when he attacked his mother with a water pitcher because he thought she was drugging him. He was declared legally insane at 29 years old (March 13 1907) and spent the last 24 years of his life in the State Insane Asylum at Jackson. Homebrew drinking was said to be a possible source of his dementia.

### Freddie Keppard (1890-1933) (cornetist)
From 1906, he led his own band in New Orleans called the Olympia Orchestra. He was the first jazz musician **with an offer** to record, but turned it down (the all-white Original Dixieland Jass Band was the first to record in 1917). He and Sidney Bechet first noticed Louis Armstrong on the street corners singing with the quartet. In 1914, after New Orleans work became lean, he moved to LA with George Baquet and 5 other New Orleans musicians and got work touring vaudeville theaters (1914-1918) as the Original Creole Orchestra. He spent the 20’s in Chicago, and didn’t start recording until 1926 when his health started to fail.

He was offered to record by Victor Talking Machine company in 1915 (New York) but it never happened because of a number of reasons: 
- He wouldn’t do a free test recording to see if the recording device would record the band 
- He said “nothing doing boys, **we won’t put our stuff on records for everybody to steal”** and was concerned about audiences not showing up live
- He wanted as much money as Enrico Caruso was getting and was turned down

### Sidney Bechet (1897-1959)
Bechet played both clarinet and soprano sax with a huge vibrato and very bluesy style. He was very influential to Johnny Hodges and later Coltrane. Bechet was discovered by Keppard playing along with a band at age 9. By age 13, he was playing New Orleans in top bands. He travelled to Europe in 1919 as a member of Will Marion Cook’s Southern Syncopated Orchestra. When the SSO broke up around 1921, he picked up the soprano sax. He loved the fact he could play it louder than the clarinet because he always hated having to play 2nd to the louder trumpet. One of the earliest published recognition of jazz was by Swiss conductor Ernest Ansermet who said when he heard Bechet: "he is the highway in which the whole world will move tomorrow."

On June 23, 1923 he recorded for the first time with Clarence Williams’s Blue Five, which was three months after Armstrong and Oliver made their first recording. He played with Ellington in 1924. From 1932 to 1934 he quit music and set up a tailor shop in Harlem. He came back to music when Dixieland had a revival in the late 30’s early 40’s. In 1949 he travelled to Europe to stay. He found adulation, financial security, and social acceptance that no black musician could find in the States. His career lasted right up to his death. He was considered the only musician of the era who could hold his own with Louis Armstrong.