# Louis Armstrong and Papa Joe
February 9, 2022

Among a wide world of musicians and talent, two of the most influential names in jazz history were Joe "King" Oliver and Louis Armstrong.



## Joe "King" Oliver (1885-1938) (trumpet)
Oliver was Armstrong's mentor, becoming well-established before Armstrong was in the scene. Louis would refer to Oliver as "Papa Joe." 

## Louis Armstrong (1901-1971) (trumpet)
Armstrong grew up in New Orleans, the son of a prostitute, in a rough neighborhood referred to as "The Battlefield." He was born 8/4/1901, but always referred to his birthday as July 4th, 1900. He sang in the quartet on the streets to make money, and Bunk Johnson and Sidney Bechet first noticed Louis singing in black Storyville in 1912. Sidney invited Louis over to dinner, gave him money to fix his shoes for the walk, but Louis never showed. Zutty Singleton would tell stories of how he would see “little Louie” singing in the streets. He also played a tin-horn to bring attention to his coal wagon deliveries - there are three theories to how this coal operation came about:
- His mother's employers would have Louis sell some of their wares
- He would find coal on the side of the rail tracks and sell it
- The Karnofsky Family employed him to sell coal

From 1907 to 1912 he worked for the Morris Karnofsky family. The Karnofsky family were Jewish and very kind to Louis. He would wear a star of David in remembrance of their kindness, as "the first good white people" he had met.

After an incident on New Years Eve in 1912 when Armstrong was caught firing a starter's pistol (or maybe a .38 with blanks?), he was placed for 3 year (or 1.5?) into a juvenile detention facility called the Colored Waifs Home for Boys. He received his first trumpet there and played in the band, getting his first experience of a structured and orderly life. The home was far from luxurious, and was established in an old, abandoned and decaying building originally designed to house French orphans around seventy years earlier. Louis could hear Keppard playing parties from his bedroom window at the Waifs home.

After Louis got out of the Waifs home, his first jobs were back in black Storyville. He worked shows at a honky-tonk owned by Henry Ponce, and then at the Sicilian Henry Matranga’s. The scene was very rough and violent: guns, knives, razor blades, etc. Louis met Joe Oliver during this time in 1916.