# Swing Musicians cont.
Intro song: Bob Burg - ???

## Lester Young (1909 - 1959) (tenor sax)
Born in Mississippi, and raised in New Orleans, Lester is one of the most important figures in all of jazz history. He came from a musical family. He played with the family band through the 20's as a drummer, but he never got to meet anybody after the show as he was packing up his drums, so he switched to a "simpler instrument." He had an abusive father and left home at 18.

He ended up in KC in 1933 and began work with Bennie Moten's band. A year later, he joined Basie's band. He then attempted to replace Hawkins in Henderson's band, but was rejected after a few months due to conflicting styles. He rejoined Basie in 1936, left again in 1940, and joined one last time in 1943 before getting drafted in 1944. He would not join as a regular member after the war, but made plenty of guest appearances.

His style paved the way for modern saxophonists, with more swinging, a lighter sound, less vibrato, and more graceful & restrained techniques. He focused more on melody rather than harmony (Hawkins), and this approach became one of two major schools of style. He admired Jimmy Dorsey and Frankie Trumbauer, and offered a sort of continuation of "cool jazz." His nickname was "Prez," which was an abbreviation for president of the tenor sax, awarded to him by Billie Holiday. His recordings with her are some of jazz histories finest. The movie “Round Midnight” (1986) was largely based on Young’s life.

## Benny Goodman (1909 - 1986) (clarinet, bandleader)
Although he was not known as a very "nice" guy, Goodman was a part of many musicians' lives. Born in Chicago to a very poor family of Jewish immigrants, his father insisted that he join the musical youth outreach program at their synagogue. He fell in love with the clarinet and had the opportunity to practice with very talented people. At 12, he had joined the Central Park Theatre, and at 13, he started making more money than his father could make in a month. 

He met Bix Biederbeck aboard a boat in 1923 and soon dropped out of school to perform full-time. By 1925 he was playing at the Midway Dancing Gardens with veterans of NORK, and it was here when Ben Pollack asked him to go to California to play in his band. He soon returned to Chicago and became fairly well-known performing on the radio, after he was encouraged by Hammond to start his own big band. The success of his nation-wide tour, ending at the Palomar Ballroom in 1935, brought him national attention and is said to be the official start of the Swing era.

Goodman hired a Black piano player named Teddy Wilson, and thus formed the first interracial performing band in America.