# Duke Ellington
March 16, 2022

---

Intro song: Duke Ellington - Sophisticated Lady (performed by Dave Grusin)

## Benny Goodman Band (recap)
First interracial jazz band with the following Black players:
- Teddy Wilson, piano
- Lionel Hampton, vibraphonist
- Charlie Christian, guitarist

As a quartet (minus Christian), they played "I Got Rhythm" by George Gershwin (on listening test). Christian joined later to make a quintet, after an insisting recommendation by John Hammond (though it is rumored that Mary Lou Williams gave Hammond the advice on Christian). In fact, Hammond ambushed a hesitant Goodman at a concert by introducing the band, with it's newest addition of Christian on guitar. Goodman proceeded to throw the most difficult songs in the repertoire at the fastest tempos, whereas Christian performed flawlessly. Unfortunately, he only played at his height for 2 or 3 years before dying of tuberculosis. Nevertheless, he made an enormous impact on jazz guitar and remains a major part of any jazz guitar education to this day. Eddie Lang and Lonnie Johnson were influential as well, but he was considered the first "big name" in jazz guitar, as well as the first electric jazz player.

## Bebop
Considered a muscian's outlet of total artistic freedom, bebop was a style of jazz which catered less to the dancers in the audience. If Christian would have lived to see the genre erupt, he would certainly have been in the vanguard. In fact, bebop is said to have been born at Minton's Playhouse, a New York club which had jam sessions every Monday night and where Christian frequently attended. See video of "Stompin' at the Savoy," recorded live at Minton's on 5/12/1941.

## Duke Ellington (1899-1974) (piano, bandleader, composer-arranger)
A prolific master of the era, he recorded over 200 albums and had the longest running band in all of jazz history.

Nicknamed “Duke” from a school friend, he had somewhat of a pampered childhood unlike Louis and Goodman. Ellington started playing music in Washington, D.C. in 1917 in early groups such as "The Duke’s Serenaders" and "The Washingtonians." Elmer Snowden was the original leader of the Washingtonians (originally called the Washington Black Sox), however, he got caught helping himself to more than his share of the pay and the band members voted Duke to take over as leader.
Ellington e worked on building up his technique by slowing down James P. Johnson piano rolls and analyzing the fingering. In January of 1923, Duke heard Sidney Bechet playing in a traveling vaudeville revue called “How Come” in the Howard Theater in Washington. He moved to New York in 1923 on the encouragement of Fats Waller as the inspiration of hearing Bechet in “How Come,” after his first attempt in 1922 failed. Very soon, he met up with Sonny Greer and Otto Hardwick.

In 1924 he was working with his Washingtonians (6 pieces) at their cellar club at 49th and Broadway (renamed the Hollywood Club). Paul Whiteman would come to hear Duke and leave a $50 tip. At this time, Bix was right down the block (48th and Broadway) at the Cinderella Ballroom playing with the Wolverines (their name was changed to the Personality Kids for their New York debut), and Fletcher was within this same 4 block distance at the Roseland.