# The Swing Era
March 2, 2022

Previously we covered jazz from it's arly beginning, all the way through the 1920's. What buffers the next era of jazz, the Swing era, was the Great Depression. Unemployment was nearly 40%, and this affected musicians as well. There just wasn't any money to pay for entertainers. Jazz legends like Joe Oliver and Jelly Roll Morton died in the 30's, and previously successful bands lost their soloists or broke up entirely. As well, many record companies failed and only one was left to distribute jazz music: RCA.

The Swing era has also been referred to as the Big Band era - these are fairly synonymous terms. It is considered the most popular of jazz periods, and a very wide portion of the public supported artists during this period. Radio broadcasts were critical in bringing this music to the public audience. RCA also had the foresight to arrange broadcast programming with NBC Radio, playing live music to the living rooms of entire country.

## Swing Instrumentation
The biggest instrumental difference going into the Swing era was the sheer quantity of performers. Compared to the trio arrangement of the front line of early jazz, which could play a chordal triad with one note each (depending on the instrument's range), the Swing era allowed for more room in the orchestration of notes. Chords were no longer restricted to triads, and arrangements began to include more "lush" progressions. As well, multiple instruments could be formed into sections, allowing for chords to be played using the same voices.

The Swing era saw the saxophone enter the instrumentation, and quickly became one of the most popular jazz instruments. The woodwind section soon evolved into the common configuration of 2 alto saxes, 2 tenor saxes, and a baritone sax. As well, the brass section expanded, with the trombone section commonly using 3 tenor trombones and a bass trombone. Trumpets were frequently configured as a quartet. The rhythm section, however, did not change much from the original arrangement of bass, drums, and piano.

The musicians of the early jazz era played from memory, but as arrangements became more complex, sheet music made a new appearance on the stage.

## Swing Bands and Hotspots
In New York, which was a jazz city from nearly the beginning of the genre, there existed a "higher level" of musicianship with artists such as Chick Webb, Fletcher Henderson, and Duke Ellington residing there. However, Kansas City also became a big generator of swing music, seeing the rise of Count Basie, and became as important to the development of swing as New Orleans was to early jazz.

John Hammond came from Vanderbilt money and was not a performer. However, he was integral as a talent scout in driving the popularization of swing music. He managed to convince Count Basie to move his band to New York, and supervised the last known recording sessions of Bessie Smith. He scoured the city tirelessly for new talent, and went on to discover new artists like Bob Dylan and Billie Holiday. He organized a concert at Carnegie Hall in 1938 called "From Spirituals to Swing," which served to introduce Black music to a white audience.

### Fletcher Henderson (1897 - 1952)
Another big talent scount was Fletcher Henderson, who ended up leading one of the first great jazz big bands. He joined Black Swan in 1923 after coming to New York in 1920 to pursue a degree at Columbia. When money ran out, he started his career in music as a music demonstrator on piano. His band bridged the gap between early jazz and swing. He was known as a very affable person, which affected his business success as he was commonly unable to wrangle difficult musicians into obediance. 