# Duke Ellington Orchestra + Chick Webb Band
---

Intro song: Duke Ellington Orchestra - "Take the A Train"

## Orchestra Repertoire
### In a Mellow Tone
Duke led a number of bands, orchestras, and groups, frequently utilizing **Cootie Williams (1910 - 1985) on trumpet** and **Jimmy Blanton (1918 - 1942) on bass**. He wrote and arranged "In a Mellow Tone," (on listening test) which features a solo by Cootie and follows a sort of swing "template" established by Fletcher Henderson, a rare occasion for Ellington.

### Ko-Ko
"Ko-Ko" was dedicated to the ceremonies of Congo Square, and featured both valve and slide trombones for distinct baritone-register sounds. Blanton is also featured with an exposed line, but not quite a solo (although Blanton would be the first to solo on jazz bass).

## Ben Webster (1909 - 1973) (tenor sax)
Nicknamed "The Brute," he was considered Duke's first major tenor player but a very explosive drinker. Remarkably, his embouchure never suffered. Born in Kansas City, he moved to New York and worked with both Henderson, and then Ellington (1935-36, 1940-43, and 1948-49). He was famous for his swaggering solo style, and "Cottontail" was written specifically to feature him. 

## Review Questions
- He achieved fame as a member the Count Basie Orchestra and is considered one of the greatest tenor saxophonists in jazz history:
	- Lester Young
- He was the first black musician to work with a white band:
	- Teddy Wilson
- When do many jazz historians believe the swing era began? Name the year, the band, the location:
	- 1935, Benny Goodman Band, Palomar Ballroom in Los Angeles
- His dress and his speech were as distinctive as his playing:
	- Lester Young
- The two tenor saxophone rivals in the swing era were:
	- Lester Young and Coleman Hawkins
- Name the musicians in Benny Goodman’s quartet:
	- Goodman on clarinet, Lionel Hampton on vibes, Teddy Wilson on piano, Gene Krupa on drums
- What instrument did Charlie Christian play, who’s band did he work with and what put an end to his career?
	- Guitar (electric), Goodman, tuberculosis
- What instrument did Jimmy Blanton play, who’s band did he work with and what put an end to his career?
	- Bass, Ellington, tuberculosis
- Name the three great tenor saxophonists we’ve studied in the Swing Era and list the bands that each worked with:
	- Coleman Hawkins (Henderson), Lester Young (Basie), Ben Webster (Ellington)
- What were some of Duke Ellington’s accomplishments?
	- He had an orchestra that stayed together for the longest time, and one of the best big bands that ever existed ("How did you keep your band together for so long?" "I paid them"), he was a prolific composer with many standards and hits, one of the greatest piano players.
- What was the key ingredient that helped propel Duke and Benny’s career?
	- National radio broadcasting (Ellington from the Cotton Club, Goodman from "Let's Dance")
- Who was Billy Strayhorn?
	- Duke Ellington's right-hand man, writing partner, and confidant, he wrote "Take the A Train" which is considered Ellington's theme song

---

## Chick Webb (1909 - 1939) (drums, bandleader)
Suffering from spinal tuberculosis (a theme), he only grew to 4'9" and was in constant pain. He would routinely writhe on the ground in anguish after each show. He moved to New York in 1925. Webb's home club since 1927 was the Savoy Ballroom, a massive establishment in Harlem. Known for his sense of swing, playing technique, and arrangements, he was musically illiterate. He is also known for introducing Ella Fitzgerald in 1934, and led Webb's band after his death until it disbanded in 1942. He died in a Baltimore hospital as the King of Swing at the age of 30.

## Ella Fitzgerald (1918 - 1996) (vocals)
Homeless for nearly two years after running away from a juvenile home for delinquents, she was discovered at the Apollo Theatre during a singing contest but was denied the prize of a week's work because the manager deemed her unattractive. Webb sent out his vocal soloist, Charles Lynton, to scour the city for new talent. When Lynton brought Ella back, Webb was appalled. However, her talent shined through her "offensive" looks, and she quickly rose to prominence with flawless intonation and sense of swing. In 1937, she beat Billie Holliday in both of the country's leading swing magazines for best female vocalist. 

## Louis Jordon (1908 - 1975) (sax, bandleader)
Jordon was fired from Webb's band for trying to poach members for a new band. He was successful nonetheless, and ran his own band, "the Tympani Five," for 20 years. Known for his "jump blues" style, he was a leading innovator of hybrid up-tempo dance songs combining jazz, boogie-woogie, and blues. This new style of music signified the transition from big bands to R&B and commercial music. Comedy and entertainment were a big part of the performance, and Jordon's animated band was considered by some as a continuation of minstrelry.