# Late Swing Artists
March 30, 2022

Intro song: Nina Simone - Strange Fruit

## Billie Holliday (1915 - 1959) (vocals)
Billie Holiday was singing in Harlem clubs, and was discovered at Monette's by John Hammond in 1933, around the time that he also discovered Benny Goodman. In fact, Goodman's first recording, produced by Hammond, featured Holliday. She was also with Count Basie's band for at least a year in 1937. Born in Balitmore, she moved to New York in 1928 and was recruited to a brothel; she was arrested for prostitution. In 1938, she joined with clarinetist Artie Shaw, a leader of a white band and was one of the first Black singers to publically perform interracially. In 1939, she started singing at the Cafe Society in Greenwich Village. She became extremely popular in the 40's, but got into heroin and other drugs, as well as heavy drinking. She died of cirrhosis at the age of 44.

## Mary Lou Williams (1910 - 1981) (piano/composer)
Playing with Andy Kirk and the Twelve Clouds of Joy out of Kansas City, MO, she was long regarded as "the only significant female musician in jazz." She composed for the Clouds, as well as Duke Ellington, Benny Goodman, Lewis Hines, Dizzy Gillespie, and many others.

## Roy Eldridge (1911-1989) (Trumpet) 
One of the most advanced soloists of the swing era, he is considered as the link between swing and modern jazz (bebop). Bands that featured Eldridge were Fletcher Henderson (1936), Gene Krupa (1941 - 43), and Artie Shaw (1944 - 45). He was one of the first black musicians to be accepted as a permanent member of an all-white trumpet section in an all-white band.
Heavily influenced by Louis Armstrong, he was in kind a great influence on later bop artists, specifically Gillespie.

## Bebop
The birthplace of bebop is contested, but Minton's is a very important place in the development of bebop. Considered the first entry in the history of "modern" jazz, it marked the dissatisfaction of musicians with the blandness and restrictions of the swing era. It catered less to commercial success and a dancing audience; as a result, from this time jazz began its decline in listening population.