# Musicians of the Swing Era
March 7, 2022

Intro song: Dave Gruson - Somewhere (from West Side Story)

Just as Fletcher Henderson's band became the ideal arrangement for big bands, Coleman Hawkins became the model saxophonist for the era.

## Coleman Hawkins (1904-1969) (tenor sax)
Involved in Fletcher Henderson's big band, he was the dominating force in influencing sax style (though Lester Young's style became influential as well). Going by nicknames of "Hawk" and "Bean," he recorded his first solo on the song "Mean Blues" with Mammie Smith's Jazz Hounds. He joined Henderson and his group in 1923, just as the sax was beginning to make an appearance in jazz, and stayed until 1934. His playing became a model for saxophone in jazz. Between Hawkins and Lester Young, their styles formed two major schools of technique during this era. After his time with Henderson, he left the States due to racial relations, and toured Europe for about 5 years until the first outbreaks of WW2. He is said to have stated his desire to live among "his people" in Harlem. 

When he came back, he had already started with a big band but became more well known for his smaller group arrangements. His recording of "Body and Soul" became one of his hits, which barely featured any horns, as well as a very limited melody before launching into a solo. He also recorded a version of "The Man I Love" in a similar fashion, briefly mentioning the melody before soloing. His career continued through the 60's, but years of hard drinking caught up with him. 

## Count Basie (piano, bandleader)
Basie is said to have claimed that he wanted to be remembered "as a nice guy." Most believe he was from Kansas City, which is where Hammond discovered him; however, he was actually born in Red Bank, NJ. During the KC days of the 1930's, Herschel Evans and Lester Young were his two tenor sax power players. The Great American Rhythm Section was also featured here, with Jo Jones on drums, Walter Page on bass, Freddy Green on guitar, and Basie on piano. He idolized Fats Waller and James P Johnson, and had the opportunity to mentor under Waller.

Hammond convinced Basie to move to New York and his concerts from the Famous Door were broadcast on the radio. The NY scene was a little more polished, with musicians reading a lot of music and having a bit more extensive education, whereas the KC scene was more centered around the jam session style of playing. Known as "head arrangements," riffs would be memorized rather than written down. Focus is on soloists, the use of interludes, and trading notes, which was not typical of other arrangements in the era. Basie also pioneered the idea of "comping" as a piano style, with very economical and spacious playing.