# Cool Musicians cont.
April 13, 2022

Intro song: Chick Corea - "Humpty Dumpty"

We always study famous people in history, some more prominent than others. Miles is maybe the most well known figure in the history of jazz.

## Miles Davis (1926-1991) (trumpet, bandleader)
Miles was not a very nice person and his life was full of mistakes, however he is integral to the development of modern jazz Born in St. Louis, he encountered the Billy Eckstein big band on their tour, and was brought in by Clark Terry when the band found themselves one trumpet short. This experience, on stage alongside Bird and Dizzy, cemented Davis's decision to undertake jazz as a career.

Miles came from a wealthy family, as his father was a dentist. Miles was only able to convince his father to move to New York for music by getting admitted to Juilliard in 1944. He soon dropped out after finally tracking down Charlie Parker and becoming his roommate. Miles was able to keep up with Parker's hard-bop after his exit from Dizzy's band, and made a name for himself.

Unfortunately, Miles became addicted to heroin, and he soon found himself under the ire of untrusting friends. His father even had him arrested in order to help him quit. Miles returned home in 1953 to kick the habit and was successful after a week in isolation.

Unlike Armstrong, Miles was able to evolve his style and participate in a variety of jazz genres. He recorded in modal jazz, fusion, cool jazz, and more. In fact, most innovative genres in the development of post-war jazz saw Miles at the forefront.

## Modern Jazz Quartet
One of the few jazz groups who went by a name of their own, rather than that of the bandleader, they were formed from members of Dizzy's big band and included John Lewis on piano, Milt "Bags" Jackson on vibes, Kenny Clarke on drums, and Ray Brown on bass. Brown was replaced by Percy Health in 1951, and Connie Kay replaced Clarke in 1955. They were one of the bands which displayed by example that drugs and alcohol were not necessary for a successful jazz band. They presented their music in a "classical" way, playing concert halls and wearing tuxedos. Lewis was one of the arrangers on "Birth of the Cool." MJQ was one of the longest lasting groups from 1955 to 1974, and reuniting in the 1980s. They recorded a song called "Django," which of course was dedicated to...

## Django Reinhardt (1910-1953) (guitar)
Reinhardt was a Belgian Gypsy, and considered the first great European jazz musician. His fretting hand was badly burned and he lost the use of two of his fingers, which led to the development of his signature sound. In 1934, he formed La Quintette du Hot Clud de France with violinist Stephane Grappelli.

## Chet Baker (1929 - 1988) (tenor sax)
## Gerry Mulligan (1927 - 1996) 