# Cool Jazz cont.
April 20, 2022

Kind of Blue

Some of the critiques of jazz by the "classical" group of musicians is that blues was too prominent, 4/4 time was too common, and that in general the genre seemed "stuck."

## Dave Brubeck (1920-2012) (piano, composer)
Brubeck's career lasted over six decades, and “his experiments in odd time signatures, improvised counterpoint, polyrhythm and polytonality remain hallmarks of innovation.” Originally, he planned to become a veterinarian and return to his father’s ranch in CA. He worked his way through school playing piano and soon changed his major to music. He enlisted in the army, was headed to the front but his performance caused a General to keep him back to entertain troops.

Dave Brubeck studied under Darius Milhaud in college, and was told that one of the greatest things you can do as a musician is travel the world and aborb the music of many cultures. He travelled to Turkey and heard an unusual time signature being performed by a group of street musicians. Upon asking where they got the rhythm, one replied "This rhythm is to us what the blues is to you." After returning from the trip, Brubeck was enamoured with "alternative" time signatures and wrote "Blue Rondo ala Turk" and "Take Five," which would go on to be the number 1 best-selling jazz single of all time. The album "Time Out" (1959) was also the first jazz album to sell over a million records. 

Brubeck's quartet contained Paul Desmond on alto sax, a prominent cool jazz player who basically wrote "Take Five." The “classic” Dave Brubeck Quartet consisted of Desmond, Eugene Wright on bass, and Joe Morello on drums. They dissolved in December of 1967 but Brubeck would sustain a quartet until his death.

## Norman Granz (1918-2001) (promoter, producer)
The owner of the Verve record company, he was instrumental in bringing jazz to the popular forefront and was an adamant anti-segregationist. He refused to tour the South due to segregation policy and how his Black musicians were treated. 

Before WW2, Granz began producing shows around Los Angeles. He brought musicians together and also got black and white patrons together by insisting that club owners suspend their segregation policies. At 25, he produced the first "Jazz at the Philharmonic" concert at the Los Angeles Philharmonic Auditorium on July 2, 1944. His goal was to raise money to offset legal fees for the Latinos and Blacks due do the “Zoot-Suit Riots.” JATP was a huge success and marked the start of Granz's meteoric rise as a producer.

By the 1950s, Granz had become one of the most important producers in jazz.  
He produced Ella’s "Songbook" series for the Verve label, which became some of the greatest LPs of the 20th-century. In 1949, he discovered Oscar Peterson and brought him from Canada to the U.S. to record and perform. As a result, Oscar won a Grammy and gave the award to Granz as a way of saying thank you. Between 1953 and 1956, Granz produced the solo recordings of Art Tatum. He retired in 1986. Granz's diplomacy and honesty enabled him to bring together the biggest stars of the era and present them in  
what was essentially a jam-session format.
