# Hard Bop
April 25, 2022

### Review
- Which jazz era followed Bebop?
>Cool Jazz and Hard Bop

- White musicians were said to dominate which genre of jazz?
> Cool/"West Coast"

- What is the different between East and West coast jazz?
> Cool

- What is the "lineage" of the cool sound in jazz?
> Paul Whiteman's band, Trumbauer, etc.

- Which big band was the most direct influence on the "cool" era?
> Claude Thornehill

- Which LP defined the "cool" era?
> "Birth of the Cool"

- Which LPs were produced due to the success of the first "cool" LP?
> Capitol wanted more records like "Miles Ahead," "Sketches of Spain," and "Porgy and Bess"

- Name a trumpeter and arranger who defined the cool era?
> Miles Davis, Gil Evans

- Miles Davis's career began with which artist?
> Charlie Parker

- Miles first influence was a result of hearing and playing with who?
> The Billy Eckstine Band

## Hard Bop Defined
Synonyms include soul jazz, gospel jazz, funky jazz, straight-ahead, mainstream and east coast. To generalize in the simplest way, hard bop players were from the east coast and black.  
Hard bop was considered the first neoclassical period in jazz, beginning in 1954.  Neoclassical means: “new expressions of classical jazz styles.” The cool musicians were seen as “gimmicks rather than valid developments of the jazz tradition.”  
Hard bop was therefore a return to the more classic tradition of a pure jazz evolution and created within the  
black culture in the hope of excluding whites from being able to perform the music.  
Differences from Bebop:  
“Funky melodies were more riff-like and rhythmically and melodically simpler than bop.”  
Original compositions, with original chord progressions.  
Overall tempos are slower.  
Harmony (of melody) and counterpoint are used.  
The groups are arranged and rehearsed.  
Standards are not used.  
More variety in accompaniment patterns.  
More composers and arrangers.  
Differences from Cool:  
Drummers of hard bop were louder and more intrusive.  
Based on Parker rather than Young.  
More funky, earthy, and gospel like.  
Standard instrumentation is quintet (trumpet, tenor, p, b, d).  
Hard-driving feel or grove with more emphasis on swinging.

## Art Blakey (1919-1991) (drums/bandleader)
Blakey is most known for his band “the jazz messengers” and became the first American jazz group to perform in Japan. Many of the most notable hard bop players were first a member of Blakey's jazz messengers: Brown, Silver, Freddie Hubbard, Johnny Griffin, Donald Byrd, Lee Morgan, Wayne Shorter, Keith Jarrett, Bradford, Wynton Marsalis, Mobley, Kenny Dorham to name a few. 

Blakey studied under Chick Webb and in 1942 formed his first group with Mary Lou Williams. From 1943-44 he was playing with Henderson, then from 1944-47 was with Eckstine at the same time as Bird, Dizzy, and Sarah Vaughan.  
When Eckstine disbanded, Blakey organized the 17 messengers and recorded with an octet called the jazz messengers.  Interestingly, both Blakey and Horace had a group called the jazz messengers. Once Horace set of on his own, Blakey kept the name.

Key tracks include:
- ETA - Wynton Marsalis (trumpet), Charles Fambrough (bass), Bobby Watson (alto sax), Art Blakey (drums), James Williams (piano) 
- The Preacher (recorded 2/6/55) - Kenny Dorham (trumpet), Doug Watkins (bass), Hank Mobley (sax), Art Blakey (drums), Horace Silver (piano)