# Hard Bop cont.
April 27, 2022

## Sonny Rollins (1930 - ) (tenor sax/composer/bandleader)
Rollins grew up in Harlem and accordingly, he was influenced by Coleman Hawkins and Louis Jordan. He displayed great creativity on the sax in his teens, and was playing with Miles and Monk by the time he was 20. Like so many great New York musicians, he ended up addicted to heroin for a time, and even spent some time in prison.  After playing with Monk (1948), Davis (1949-54), and Max Roach & Clifford Brown (1954-57), he led his own bands. From 1956-58 he was considered the top talent and innovator of tenor sax in jazz. Listen to "The Preacher" (1956) recorded with Doug Watkins (bass), Max Roach (drums), and Tommy Flanagan (piano), as well as the Rollins-composed "Blue 7."

## Clifford Brown (1930 - 1956) (trumpet)
Brown, with Max Roach, led one of the quintessential hard bop ensembles of the era. Though he recorded only from 1952-56, he is considered one of the greatest trumpet players alongside Dizzy, Miles, and Quincy Jones. He swore off drugs and alcohol, but unfortunately died in a car accident. His playing carried the accuracy of a piano. He loves math, chess, and his family. The arrival of Brown on the jazz scene, along with the death of Charlie Parker, is said to sway the culture away from heroin towards "cleaner playing."

## Tommy Flanagan (1930 - 2001) (piano)
Known for his "comping" ability while playing with the Rollins band, he also worked with Tony Bennett and was the musical director for Ella Fitzgerald. He was also influenced by Art Tatum, Teddy Wilson, and Bud Powell.

## Max Roach (1924 - 2007) (drums)
The house drummer at Monroe's Uptown House, he would start playing in bop but would continue on throughout subsequent eras. He recorded in the 40's with Parker and Gillespie, and many others, and was even on some of the "Birth of the Cool" tracks. He is most known for the Roach/Brown quintet, one of the greatest bands of the hard bop era. His "Freedom Now Suite" included "We Insist," reflecting the Civil Rights Movemnt of the 1960's.