# Bebop
March 4, 2022

Charlie Parker is considered among the best of the Bebop era. Upcoming musicians sought to study and emulate his style, and he was extraordinarily influential in the genre. Unfortunately, this influence also included the allure of heroin and other drugs.

## Dizzy Gillespie (1917 - 1993) (trumpet)
Gillespie was given the nickname "Dizzy" due to his clownish behavior, particularly in the Cab Calloway band which he was part of from 1939-41. He got his start in Teddy Hill's band and got his start at Minton's. He ended up getting fired for the band after being blamed for throwing spitballs on stage. He was not a drug addict, and was one of the more successful musicians of bebop and latter periods. He was considered a virtuoso of the era, on par with Armstrong of the earlier century. He met Parker in 1940 but could not sustain a lasting musical relationship due to Bird's addictions. 

He formed a bop combo in 1942, playing with Oscar Pettiford, Max Roach, Lester Young, and Thelonius Monk until 1944. They brought bop out of Harlem to the more "intellectual" midtown and downtown areas of Manhattan. In 1945, he formed his own big band. He also attempted to form a group with Parker in this year. In 1946, he formed another group called the Hep-Stations, which would define and carry his style from 1947 to his death.

He was one of the first to popularize latin rhythms in American jazz. The Hep Stations's rhythm section was called the Modern Jazz Quartet (MJQ) and consisted of John Lewis, Milt Jackson, Kenny Clark, and Ray Brown.

## Thelonius Monk (1917 - 1982) (piano)
Monk may be one of the most recognizable names in jazz. He was the house pianist at Minton's. Not many appreciated Monk's style at first, but he became well-respected and greatly influential as time went on. He trained Bud Powell who would go on to become another hugely influential pianist in bebop. He was prized as one of the greatest composers of jazz.