# Exam 1 Review
October 11, 2021

## Chapter 21
- How do electric charges work?
- Attractive/repulsive forces
- Smallest positive charge is a proton; smallest negative charge is an electron ($\pm 1.602 \times 10^{-19}\text{ C}$)
- Total charge: $Q_{total} = q_1 + q_2 + ... + q_n$
### Coulomb's Law
- Two point charges separated by a finite distance exert forces on each other; notice the similarity between the gravitational force and the electric force:
$$
F_g = \frac{Gm_1m_2}{r^2} \\
F_e = \frac{k\vert q_1q_2\vert}{r^2} \\
m_{proton} = 1.67 \times 10^{-27}\text{ kg} \\
k = 9 \times 10^9 \frac{\text{ Nm}^2}{\text{ C}^2} \\
k = \frac{1}{4\pi\epsilon_0};\epsilon_0 = 8.85 \times 10^{-12}\frac{\text{ C}^2}{\text{ Nm}^2}
$$
- In a system of point charges, each charge interacts with **all* charges around it; the net force applied to a point charge depends on its interaction with all charges in consideration.
- 1. Calculate the magnitude and direction of each force vector
- 2. Separate the vectors into components (using Pythagorean theorem)
- 3. Sum the components of each vector
- 4. Calculate the magnitude of the resultant vector
- What is the electric field?
- The field of effectivity of a source charge on a test charge $q_0$ at point p
$$
\vec{E} = \frac{kq}{r^2}\hat{r}\frac{\text{ N}}{\text{ C}} \\
\vec{F_e} = q_0\vec{E} \rightarrow \vec{E} = \frac{\vec{F_e}}{q_0}
$$
- The net electric field of a system of source charges at a point p is the algebraic sum of each electric field value
- A continuous distribution of charge is an object whch contains very large numbers of charged particles
- - We must consider the **charge density** of the object (charge $Q$ over length $l$)
- - A small part of charge $dq$ over $dx$ is equal to the charge density:
$$ \frac{dq}{dx} = \lambda \rightarrow dq = \lambda dx $$
Finding a substitute for the radius $r$, we can then use the electric field formula in an integral over a length $l$.

## Chapter 22
### Gauss's Law
$$
\Phi_e = \cint \vec{E}\cdot d\vec{A} = \frac{q_{enclosed}}{\epsilon_0}
$$

The trick to Gauss's Law is using a proper Gaussian surface.
$$
E\cint dA = EA = \frac{q_{encl}}{\epsilon_0} \rightarrow E = \frac{q_{encl}}{A\epsilon_0}
$$
Remember, enclosed charge is equal to the charge density times the length; area varies depending on the shape (sphere/cylinder/etc).

- In an insulated sphere, the charges are evenly distributed *inside* the sphere; in a conducting sphere, the charge is pushed *out* to the perimeter "shell" of the sphere. Thus, an insulated sphere has an internal electric field while a conducting sphere has no internal electric field.
- - Metals are conductors; use contextual hints!

## Chapter 23
