# August 30, 2021
# Chapter 21: Electric Charge and Electric Field

## Electric Charge

Electrostatics are interactions between electric charges which are at rest. Two plastic rods placed near to each other neither attract nor repel each other - they are *neutral* as they contain an equal number of protons and electrons. However, when a piece of fur is rubbed on the rods, the rods will then repel each other. The rods are *negatively charged* by the fur.

Even when two objects are neutral, they still have an interaction with each other through exerting a gravitational force, defined by $$\frac{Gm_1m_2}{r^2}$$

Gravitiation force is known as a field force - it is always an attractive force. For electric force, is can be attractive or repulsive.

When the fur is rubbed on a plastic rod, electrons are transferred to the rod and the rod becomes negatively charged, whereas the fur becomes positively charged.

Similarly, a glass rod rubbed with silk will become positively charged, whereas the silk will become negatively charged. Electrons from the rod will be transferred to the silk.

If we take one of the charged plastic rods and place it next to a charged glass rod, the rods will *attract* each other.

These transfers are between *valence* electrons - that is, electrons which are in an outer *electron shell* which is not full or closed. 

Electric charge is quantized - that is, one electron has a single unit of charge. We cannot transfer half of an electron - charge is accumulated in integer amounts:
$$
\[
e = 1.602 * 10^19 \text{C}
\]