# Chapter 21: Electric Charge and Electric Field
September 1, 2021

## Brief Review

Objects are generally neutral in their charge - thus, they have equal numbers of electrons and protons. Objects can be charged by interacting with another object, depending on their individual properties regarding their tendency to shed or attract electrons.

Oppositely charged objects attract each other, whereas similarly charged objects repel each other.

Electric charge is quantized in units of electron charge, where C is 1 Coulomb:
$$ e = 1.602 * 10^{-19} \text{ C} $$

The number of "extra" charges, where N is the number of extra charges, can be expressed as:
$$q = e*N$$

## The Law of Conservation of Electric Charge
Electric charge is conserved - no net electric charge can be created or destroyed. The algebraic sum of the total charge cannot charnge in any interaction.

When quantizing charge, we can differentiate between positive and negative charges using <span>*e*<sup>+</sup> or *e*<sup>-</sup>

In the plastic rod/fur interaction, we can hypothesize some numbers to work with:
$$
\text{Let } q_p = 4e^+ + 4 e^- = 8e \\
\text{Let } q_f = 3e^+ + 3 e^- = 6e 
$$

Thus, in this intereaction there are only 14*e* charges, forever and always. Any charges lost by the fur must be transferred to the rod.

**Avogadro's number**: 1.0 mol = 6.02 x <span>10<sup>23</sup></span> particles

Atoms are made up of protons, neutrons, and electrons. Neutrons are neutral and have no charge. Protons have the same mass as neutrons, and have a positive charge. Electrons are much smaller than protons, but have the same inverse amount of charge as protons.

Electrons "orbit" the nucleus of protons and neutrons in "shells," an abstract representation. In reality, electrons can hypothetically be found anywhere in a "cloud" of a certain radius, depending on the atom's atomic number (i.e. how many "shells" the atom has). Valence electrons are those found in the outermost "open" shell and are free to interact with other atoms. In this manner, an atom can gain or lose valence electrons and become positively or negatively charged. A charged atom is known as an **ion**.

Electrons are considered to be simple particles, in that they are currently not known to be made of smaller elements. Protons and neutrons used to be considered the same way, but we now know that they are constructed of quarks. The charge of the quarks in a proton add up to 1e, and sum to 0 in neutrons.

## Conductors and Insulators
Essentially, any metal is a conductor. Conductors allow charges to "flow" from one object to another. Conversely, insulators block the flow of electric charge. An object can be charged via **conduction** by connecting a neutral object with a charged object with a conductive object.

An object can also be charged by **induction**. When a charged object is moved near to a neutral object (without touching it), the charges in the neutral object begin to distribute themselves according to their attraction/repellance to the charged object. Now, if the neutral object is connected to the ground with a conductive wire, the object will lose charges according to the charge of the charged object and the neutral object is now charged (as is the ground - the Earth).

Similarly, a charged object can attract a neutral insulating object through **polarization**.

## Coulomb's Law
### Measuring electric force between charged points
Coulomb designed an experiment to measure the amount of force between two charged particles. The only factors in determining the force involved in an electric interaction is the distance and charge

The magnitude of the electric force between two point charges is directly proportional to the product of their charges and inversely proportional to the square of the distance between them:

$$ F = k\frac{\vert q_1q_2\vert}{r^2} $$

where *k* is known as the electrostatic constant: <span>8.89 x 10<sup>9</sup> N &middot; m<sup>2</sup>/C<sup>2</sup></span>
{% include mathjax.html %}