# Electric Field - Wrapping Up
September 15, 2021

## Continuous Charge Distributions
The linear charge density of an object of length $L$ and charge $Q$ is defined as 

$$\lambda = \frac{Q}{L}$$

Linear charge density, which has units $\frac{\text{C}}{\text{m}}$, is the amount of charge per meter of length

The electric field of a single point charge can be measured by 

$$\vec{E} = k\frac{q}{r^2}$$

On the other hand, with a linear charge distribution, we must integrate to find the total charge: 

$$d\vec{E} = k\frac{dq}{r^2}$$

In addition to linear distributions (1-D), we can also have 2-D and 3-D distributions.

Across area A, the charge distribution is defined as 

$$\sigma = \frac{Q}{A}$$

with units $\frac{\text{C}}{\text{m}^2}$, charge per square meter. 

A volume charge distribution is defined as 

$$\rho = \frac{Q}{V}$$

or charge per unit volume ($\frac{\text{C}}{\text{m}^3}$).

## Examples
A rod of length L has a uniform positive charge lamda per unit length and a total charge Q. Calculate the electric field at a point P that is located along the long axis of the road at a distance a from one end.

## Solutions
The electric field of a point charge is $\vec{E} = k\frac{q}{r^2}$.
For one section of the rod, the field is $d\vec{E} = k\frac{dq}{x^2}$. We can integrate over the entire length of the rod to get the total charge:

$$\vec{E} = \int_a^{a+L}\frac{kdq}{x^2}$$

However, $dq$ is not a very convenient rate of charge to work with. So, we can use the linear charge density to make this a distance variable:

$$\lambda = \frac{Q}{L} \\
\lambda L = Q \\
dQ = \lambda dL \rightarrow \\$$

$$\vec{E} = \int_a^{a+L}\frac{k\lambda}{x^2}dx \\
= k\lambda\frac{-1}{x}\Biggr|_a^{a + L} \\
= k\lambda\frac{-1}{a+L} + \frac{1}{a} \\
= k\lambda\frac{L}{a(a+L)} \\
= k\frac{Q}{a(a+l)}$$

## Applications of the Electric Field
For an electric dipole, we can find the eldctric field at any point by a vector addition of the fields of the two charges. It is **very important** to consider the direction (sign) of the electric field of each point in the dipole!

Water molecules are dipoles. The molecule as a whole is electrically neutral, but the bonds within the molecule cause a displacement of charge. The result is a net negative charge on the oxygen end and a net positve charge on the hydrogen end.

## Force and torque on a dipole

When a dipole is placed in a uniform electric field, the net force is always zero, but there can still be a net torque. As the positive charge is pushed($\vec{F}_+ = q\vec{E}$) and the negative charge is pulled ($\vec{F}_- = -q\vec{E}$), we get a torque across the electric dipole moment $\vec{p} = qd$ in the direction parallel to the linear radius d between the two dipole ends:

$$\tau = \vec{p}\times\vec{E}$$

...where the magnitude of $\tau = pE\sin\phi$ and &phi; is the angle between $d$ and the applied force.

---

## Chapter 22 preview: Gauss's Law

This chapter will explore:
- how amount of charge can be determined *within* a closed surface by examining the electric field *on* the surface
- what is meant by electric flux, and how to calculate it
- how Gauss's law relates **electric flux** through a closed surface to the charge of the closed surface
- how to use Gauss's Law to calculate the electric field due to symmetric charge distribution
- where charge is located on a charged conductor

## What is Gauss's Law?
Given any general distribution of charge, we enclose it within an imaginary "surface." We can then look the the electric field at various point on that surface. Gauss's Law is a relation between the field at all points on the surface and the total charge enclosed by the surface.

A positive charge enclosed in a box will produce an **electric flux** $\Phi$ through the surface of the box radiating outward. When there are negative charges inside the box, there is electric flux pointing inwards onto the box surface.

$$\Phi_{net} = \Phi_{in} + \Phi_{out}$$

When there is a *zero net charge* inside the surface, this indicates that there are both positive and negative charges in the enclosure. There is still flux flowing into and out of the box, but the *net flux* is zero:

$$\sum Q = q_+ + q_- = 0 \rightarrow \\
\Phi_{net} = 0$$

Of course, the net flux can be zero when there are no charges in the enclosure.