# Gauss's Law and Electric Flux
September 20, 2021

To review, a state of electric flux through an imaginary "box" can be of 3 conditions:
- A charge placed in the "box," where the elctric field of the charge is encapsulated within the box. Each surface of the box has flux going through it and net flux &gt; 0.
- A series of complimentary charges inside the box, whereas the net flux of in/out is zero ($\Phi_{net} = \Phi_1 + \Phi_2 + ... + \Phi_n = 0$)
- A box with no charges inside, which has $\Phi_net = 0$ even if an external charge is providing an electric field

Thus, the net electric flux is directly proportional to the net amount of charge enclosed within the surface. The net electric field *does not depend* on the size of the surface or the area of the box. We can consider $\Phi = \vec{E}A$ - As the electric field weakens at a distance, the area of the box increases, and the flux remains consistent.

## Calculating electric flux
Consider a rectangle zone with area A. We can imagine a vector $\vec{A}$ with magnitude and direction perpendicular to the face of the area. We can then find the resultant flux of a charge through the zone with the following:

$$C = \vec{E}\cdot\vec{A} \\
C = E \cdot A\cos{\phi}$$

Thus, when the zone "faces" in plane with the direction of the electric field ($\vec{E}$ and $\vec{A}$ are parallel) then the electric flux is at its maximum value. If the area vector lies at an angle, then less flux goes through the zone, decreasing to 0 as the area approaches a right angle to the electric field vector.

This is a bit simple, in regards to reality: we assume the surface of A is nice and regular where the area is easily calculated, and that the electric charge is constant. However, we can consider *any* surface to measure, and to expand our model we must use integrals:
$$\Phi_e = \int E\cos\phi dA = \int E\perp dA = \int\vec{E}\cdot d\vec{A}$$

### Example

A square with 10-cm long edges is centered on the x-axis in a region where there exists a uniform electric field $\vec{E} = 2.0 \frac{\text{kN}}{\text{C}}\hat{i}$.
a. What is the electric flux through the surface of a square where the normal to the surface is in the x-direction?
b. What is the electric flux through the surface of a square with a normal making a 60 deg angle with the y-axis and 90 deg with the z-axis?

### Solution
a. The area "face" of the square and the electric field are in plane, so the calculation is simple:
$$\Phi = 2000 \frac{\text{N}}{\text{C}}\cdot (0.1\text{m})^2  \\
\space \\
= 20 \frac{\text{N}\cdot\text{m}^2}{\text{C}}$$

b. The "face" is now at an angle to the field vector, so we much use the cosine of the angle:
$$\Phi = (2000 \frac{\text{N}}{\text{C}}\cdot (0.1\text{m})^2)\cos 30\degree  \\
\space \\
= 17 \frac{\text{N}\cdot\text{m}^2}{\text{C}}$$

## Gauss's Law
Equivalent to Coulomb's Law, Gauss provides a differnet way to express the relation of charge and field.

Remember as before, flux is independent of the state of the surface (area, distance) and relies entirely on the charge.