# Gauss's Law cont.
September 22, 2021

## The Equation
Gauss's Law states that the total electric flux through a closed surface is equal to the total (net) electric charge encapsulated by the surface, divided by the permittivity of free space, $\epsilon_{0}$:

$$\Phi_e = \oint\vec{E}\cdot\vec{dA} = \frac{Q_{enclosed}}{\epsilon_{0}}$$

The integral is fairly simple to calculate if the electric field is constant over the entire surface of the Gaussian surface. For instance, a cubic Gaussian surface does not have an equal electric field from a point charge located at its center. A sphere is often the easiest shape to use as a Gaussian surface, since the distance $r$ is just the radius of the sphere, which doesn't change over the entire surface: 

$$\Phi_e = \oint\vec{E}\cdot\vec{dA} \\
= E\oint dA \\
= EA = \frac{Q}{\epsilon_0 A}$$

## Using Gauss's Law
The equation becomes extremely useful in calculating uniformly distributed charge in an object, such as a rod, plane, or sphere (1-D, 2-D, 3-D).

| System | Symmetry | Gaussian surface |
| --- | --- | --- |
| infinite rod | cylindrical | co-axial cylinder |
| infinite plane | planar | Gaussian "pillbox" |
| sphere or shell | spherical | Gaussian sphere |

In the "pillbox" model, the charged plane bisects a Gaussian cylinder, so that flux is going through each end of the cylinder.

### Conductors
When a conductor is charged, *all electric charge* is "pushed" to the perimeter surface of the conductor in electrostatic conditions (not in motion) - there is no internal charge. Thus, a Gaussian surface located inside the conducting material has a electric field $\vec{E} = 0$. As well, this means that there is no electirc flux flowing into or out of the object.

Conversely, a charged insulator in electrostasis *contains* all electric charge, and there electric field outside the insulating surface as a result of the charged insulator is 0.

## Example
Careful measurement of the electric field at the surface of a black box indicates that the net outward electric flux through the surface of the box is $6.0 \frac{\text{kN}\cdot\text{m}^2}{\text{C}}$.

a. What is the net charge inside the box?

b. If the net outward electric flux through the surface of the box were zero, could you conclude that there were no charges inside the box? 

### Solution
a. 
$$\Phi_{net} = 6000\frac{\text{N}\cdot\text{m}^2}{\text{C}} = \frac{Q_{enclosed}}{\epsilon_{0}} \\
\space \\ 
Q_{enclosed} = 6000\frac{\text{N}\cdot\text{m}^2}{\text{C}}\epsilon_{0} \\
\space \\ 
Q_{enclosed} = (8.85 \times 10^{-12}\frac{\text{C}^2}{\text{N}\cdot\text{m}^2})(6000\frac{\text{N}\cdot\text{m}^2}{\text{C}}) \\
\space \\ 
=5.3 \times 10^{-8} \text{C}$$

b. No - there could be equal positive and negative charges inside the box, resulting in zero *net* flux.