# Advanced HTML & Testing in Emails
October 3, 2022

## Multi-column Layouts Using Tables
Some layout strategies call for multiple columns, such as product grids, cards, calendars, etc. Using multiple tables in a single table row, we can create responsive columnar layouts.

A fluid table serves as a container which holds a child fixed-width table. That fixed-width table holds another fluid table. Finally, tables inside this second fluid width table represent each column.

Because some clients, like Outlook, do not calculate percentage values consistently, values must be under-calculated when using percents (i.e. 48% instead of 50%).

We can adjust to responsive breakpoints by using mobile-aware designs, with content that scales well to smaller screens. Combined with fluid table layouts and fluid images, media queries can adjust the width of these fluid elements for different viewports. Since mobile e-mail clients (besides some versions of Outlook) generally do not strip CSS from the `<head>`, we can use media queries inside a `<style>` tag. However, because inline styling declared in a `style` HTML attribute has higher specificity than internal CSS, we must override the widths by using the `!important` declaration in the media query.

## Animations and Interactive Emails
Since JavaScript is ignored in most e-mail clients, features such as interactivity and animation need to be implemented in other ways. We can design our email messages with better accessibility by adding hover effects, as well as increasing engagements by catching the viewer's attention.

Just like on the web browser, pseudo-classes like `:hover` can be added in internal CSS to add hover effects. Particularly, `box-shadow`, `transform`, and `transition` properties can be especially effective as hover effects.

Animations can be achieved with the use of `transition` and `animation` properties as well as `@keyframes` directives. While these are not supported by all e-mail clients, they can be very effective for users who can view them.

State can be implemented using `input` elements such as radio buttons or checkboxes, in a non-semantic way, to track changes in the other components. Using CSS, we hide the inputs with  `display: none` and use `label` elements for those inputs to serve as buttons. The `:checked` pseudo-class on an `input` can be paired with the sibling selector (`~`) to target content to be displayed.

## Testing
Many different tools exist for testing e-mail functionality - it's very important to make sure your e-mail messages are fully functional before embarking on a campaign!

- PutsMail - send emails to different email addresses for testing in a real client
- CanIEmail - compatibility charts for HTML elements in different email clients
- CampaignMonitor - CSS support for different clients
- Litmus - browser extension for previewing emails