# HTML and E-mail
September 12, 2022

## HTML
**Hypertext Markup Language (HTML)** defines the content of every webpage. Raw content is "marked up" by HTML tags, displaying text and images in a specified context. For instance, a paragraph could be wrapped in `p` tags. The web browser parses this HTML in it's rendering engine and displays a webpage accordingly.

The first line in an HTML file should be a declaration to tell the browser which version of markup that the document uses, called the **document type (`<!DOCTYPE>`)**. 99.9% of modern webpages operate with the HTML5 specification. Below the document type declaration, the `<html>` tag wraps two elements: the `<head>` element, and the `<body>` element. The title of the page, as well as meta-data, stylesheets, and some scripts, are contained in the `head`, and the content displayed to the viewer is contained in the `<body` element.

Elements can have **attributes** which can be used to describe behavior and content sources.

### CSS
**Cascading style sheets (CSS)** separate descriptions of the appearance of the contnet from the content itself. Elements may be targeted by a **selector**, using a variety of methods with an order of specificity. Elements which are in the selected set are described by the group of **declarations**, a list of **properties and values**.

CSS is referenced by an HTML document in a number of ways: a `<style>` description in the `<head>` of the document, a relative link from another file, or as a `style` attribute on a single element. In general, it is best practice to have all CSS contained in its own file; however, the `<style>` tag may be used on single HTML pages which do not share styled elements with other pages on the site.

## E-mail
3.9 billion users had an e-mail account in 2019 and spent an average of 2.5 hours every day in their mail client. It is a tremendously popular and wide-reaching medium of communication. Modern e-mail messages must be designed and programmed to be compatible with a spectrum of devices. However, there are tools available to easily create well-designed mail, and messages can be quickly tested and tracked.

E-mail clients update frequently, and each iteration has the potential to introduce breaking changes. As well, every client may use a different rendering engine. Thus, it is important for periodical mail messages to be robustly and defensively coded.

Many modern and advanced CSS rules do not work in e-mail. It's important to be able to use basic HTML and CSS effectively.