# Virtual Memory and Caches
October 5, 2021

Textbook reading: Chapter 5

## MIPS Memory Segmentation
As previously discussed, MIPS uses a default memory segmentation with a number of pointers to base addresses. These can be altered (with the exception of the "exception" handler which is hardware dependent - the program counter will need to reliably reference this address when an exception occurs, so it cannot be changed). From the kernel text address on up through the rest of the "privileged" memory segments, including I/O, a software interrupt (called "traps" in MIPS) must be called as a user to access memory addresses beyond the ktext base address. 

## Virtual memory
Caches provide fast access to a program's code and data. Main memory (RAM + storage) can also act as a cache for secondary RAM storage. The memory manager will separate virtual memory into chunks, or segments, which are themselves indexed into **pages**. The **page frame** is the holding area for pages, and a **page table** is constructed and referenced by the operating system to navigate this array of pages. The operating system implements protections to avoid collisions between programs and virtual machines. Just as we can have cache misses, where data is either not found or incorrectly conveyed to the caller, we can have **page faults**, where an accessed page is not present in the main memory. Of course, programs can share data and code, so multiple virtual addresses may be pointing to the same physical address on disk or in RAM/cache.

## Memory management and TLB
The memory management unit (MMU) is a hardware component which translates, or "maps," virtual addresses to physical addresses. One of the big benefits of virtual addresses is avoiding fragmentation, where free space in the main memory is discontinuous as it is allocated and freed. The MMU can map a block of virtual addresses to multiple separate blocks in memory. Part of the MMU, a translation lookaside buffer (TLB) is a memory cache which can reduce the time needed to fetch the mappings of virtual to physical addresses. It will store recent translations and contains page table and segment table entries.

**Hits** and **misses** indicate the success rate of cache and table queries. Clock penalties (time delays) can add up quickly depending on the level of cache - in virtual memory, a miss against the TLB results in an exception.

## Endianness
The whole reason for endianness was the option for flexibility - originally, all processors utilized big-endian structuring. The default for MIPS is little endian, whereas the x86 uses big endian. The first byte of a vector can either be stored as the "0" byte in a sequence of memory B<sub>0</sub> to B<sub>n</sub>, or at the last address of the offset B<sub>n</sub> to B<sub>0</sub> ("olleH" in little vs "Hello" in big)

## Self-study
- Read the textbook chapter
- Research cache write policies (write-thru vs write-back)
- Cache sizes and cache memory