# Introduction + OOP with Java
July 13, 2022

## Course Intro
This course is designed to help to understand how programming languages work, how they're related, and how to think about programming in different contexts.

Proper debugging demands knowledge of the underlying language. Prior knowledge prevents "gotcha" mistakes and discourages translation errors, resulting in bugs. Languages are abundant, but specific features of languages are quite sparse. Once the primary features of languages are understood, programming lnaguages and their benefits/pitfalls become much easier to understand.

"If all you have is a hammer, every problem becomes a nail" - that's great when the problem is a nail, but not so nice when the problem is a screw. The hammer might be able to use the screw as a fastener, but it won't be a fun time and you might break something. The inappropriate tool issue becomes more apparent when you try to solve problems using an "inappropriate" language - some problems can be solved in a much easier way using one language vs. a differnet language.

### Common Misconceptions
Performance is often overrated - the idea that you should always write the fastest code is incorrect. Knuth states that "premature optimization is the root of all evil." Hardware is cheap enough (to a certain point) that it is often more economical to upgrade a system to be faster, rather than paying a programmer more money to optimize a program.

Another misconception is that high-level languages are slow. This is not strictly true - Java can outperform C in some circumstances, via compiler optimizations. The choice of algorithms is usually MUCH more impactful in how efficiently your code will run.

The utility of a language or paradigm is also frequently questioned - why should anyone learn a new language? Functional programming uses to be demonized as a purely academic exercise, making code harder to understand for the fun of it. However, FP makes concurrency much simpler and good software engineering practices tend to enforce fuctional styles. This attitude is diminishing and most modern languages now support functional programming features. Logic programming paradigms are commonly characterized as useless, but certain kinds of problems are executed very easily and efficiently. This is particularly true when you know what a solution looks like, but you don't know how to get there. 20 years ago, artificial intelligence was strictly associated with logic programming languages.

Stagnation is a big misconception among programmers. One may tend towards the idea that you can become an expert in one language and thrive forever in your professional career. However, COBOL was once a vital language, Perl was once the most common language of the internet, and Java loses ground to Python every year. It is important for companies to adapt to their business requirements, and generally if one company finds a way to save money by using another language, the industry will follow the trend.

As well, it's important to vary your paradigms - being proficient in both Python and Ruby just means you have two differnt hammers. We also need to know how to use screwdrivers.

### Languages Used in This Class
- Java (class-based object-oriented programming)  
- JavaScript (prototype-based object-oriented programming)  
- Swift (functional programming)  
- Prolog (logic programming)

Why Java? It's statically typed, garbage collected, and features JIT compilation - all great features to get familiar with. It is an object-oriented language with class-based inheritance. Somewhat similarly, JavaScript is also object-oriented, but in a prototype-based way. It's dynamically typed, garbage collected, interpreted, and there are JIT compilers available.

Swift will be our example of functional programming - it's must more consistent than programming with Scala, and though it doesn't have strict functional language bounds, it does feature key functional concepts. It's statically typed, has unbounded and bounded generics, is compiled, features algebraic data types, pattern matching, typeclasses, optional call-by-name, and reference counting.

Prolog is arguably the simplest logic programming language available, and most other logic programming lnaguages assume prior knowledge of Prolog. Prolog features unification, nondeterminism, and is both interpreted and compiled.

## Object-Oriented Programming (OOP)
OOP is characterized by objects which hold fields. These fields contain data. Additionally, objects may pass messages to each other. That's it! Classes, inheritance, visibility, instance variables, etc. are all features specific to *languages* - OOP doesn't include any of these features by default. One way that message-passing is implemented is by using explicit methods - objects can call methods on other objects, and have their own methods called.

Some features which are commonly referred to as OOP-specific are, in fact, not. Overriding methods, polymorphism, abstraction, etc. are all present outside of strict OOP paradigms. As well, there are features such as class-based objects and inheritance which are not present in all OOP languages.

### Virtual Dispatch
Perhaps the most fundamental concept in object-oriented programming, virtual dispatch is the idea that code executed at runtime is determined by the runtime system. Unfortunately, this idea is commonly presented under the term **polymorphism**, which is not strictly correct. For instance, if we have two `Animals`, a `Dog` and a `Cat`, their `speak()` method might have different execution results. However, this behavior is implied - there is not necessarily any code in the program to check the type of `Animal` when the `speak` command is called. This is an example of virtual dispatch, where the implementation of a polymorphic operation is selected at runtime.

Lets write a program that does some sort of computation, and prints the result somewhere:
``` java
public class Main {
	public int doComputation() {
		// ...
	}
	
	public static void main(String[] args) {
		boolean userWantsConsole = doesUserWantConsole(args);
		int value = doComputation();
		
		if (userWantsConsole) {
			System.out.println(value);
		} else {
			String fileToWriteTo = fileUserWants(args);
			File file = new File(fileToWriteto);
			FileOutputStream stream = new FileOutputStream(file);
			stream.writeln(value);
			stream.close();
		}
	}
}
```

