# OOP with Java cont.


Yesterday, we started to get into the idea of 'virtual dispatch.'

Lets write a program that does some sort of computation, and prints the result somewhere:

``` java
// Program: reads input from user determining where to write
// Does some calculation
// Prints the output of this calculation to whereever the user said
public class Main {
	public int doComputation() {
		// ...
	}
	
	public static void main(String[] args) {
		boolean userWantsConsole = doesUserWantConsole(args);
		int value = doComputation();
		
		if (userWantsConsole) {
			System.out.println(value);
		} else {
			String fileToWriteTo = fileUserWants(args);
			File file = new File(fileToWriteto);
			FileOutputStream stream = new FileOutputStream(file);
			stream.writeln(value);
			stream.close();
		}
	}
}
```

What if `doComputation()` took a really long time to complete? An update to this code could implement a status update to how the computation is running. In this case, we'd need to copy a big chunk of the `main()` method's code into our `doComputation()` and add parameters to the method definition. As well, we'd lose progress if the process stops unexpectedly; exceptions are not handled either. We can transfer the repeated code into a helper function, but we're still repeating ourselves and just hiding it with variable references. 

The solution here (at least in Java world) is to use objects - specifically, classes.

A `Writer` class can be created with a `writeThing` method, and the whole object can be passed into `doComputation`. This saves us from making multiple references to the same data, allows for any changes to be made to be made in one place (rather than throughout the codebase), and makes the code generally easier to read.

What does this have to do with virtual displatch? Not a whole lot...yet.

We could try to implement multiple `Writer` constructors, based on the number of arguments passed to `main`, but we still would have wasted memory space for null variables. Instead of making a `Writer` class, we could try writing a `Writer` interface - a sort of template for future classes. From that, classes like  `ConsoleWriter`, `FileWriter`, `NetworkWriter` and so on may be implemented with their specific details. This eliminates the need for a conditional to check for which output method the user would like to use.

We can declare an undefined `Writer` in `main` and later, define it to be a sub-type of `ConsoleWriter`, `NetworkWriter`, etc. depending on the arguments passed to the program. A single call to a `writeThing` method in `main` has multiple sub-types of `Writer` to be attached to, dependin gon which output the user wants. However, we can't tell which sub-type is instantiated, and which version of `writeThing` is called, until runtime. **This process of figuring out which method to call at the time the program is run is an example of virtual dispatch.**

Many textbooks confuse polymorphism and virtual dispatch as being analogous - this is not true! Virtual dispatch is a type of polymorphism called 'ad-hoc polymorphism', and the idea that an object can be a sub-type of another object is called 'subtyping polymorphism.' Polymorphism as a concept is often presented by conglomerating these two versions of polymorphism together - strictly speaking, though, these are separate and different concepts.