# JavaScript and Types
July 20, 2022

In JavaScript (JS), variables aren't necessarily restricted to their originally typed declaration. A variable can be declared as a number, then reassigned to a string, without any complaint.

## Types
For our purposes, a type can be defined as some sort of data associated with operations on that data. There are a number of different ways in which different programming languages handle types. The two major categories of types are called **statically-typed** and **dynamically-typed**.

Statically-typed languages still typically allow variables to be re-assigned to different values, but not different types. For instance, a compiler will not complain about re-assigning an `int` variable to another `int`, but will throw an error if an `int` is re-assigned to a `boolean`. Statically-typed languages typically have types fixed at compile time.

Onn the other hand, dynamically-typed languages allow variables to change during runtime, and types are usually only associated with values (not their variable declarations). A variable may be re-assigned to a different value of any type at will.

A distinction can also be drawn between **strongly-typed** and **weakly-typed** languages. In short, strongly-typed languages don't "lie" about their types. A variable `x` declared as `int` will mean that `x` is an integer (until it may be re-assigned). A weakly-typed language simply means that `x` will be interpreted as an integer. For instance, a pointer in C may or may not actually point to its declared type. If it's initialized to the memory address of an integer, then a pointer declared as an integer will behave as an integer. However, if the integer pointer is uninitialized, a subsequent assignment will attempt to write that assignment to an unknown address in memory as an integer, even if that variable in the memory address isn't an integer. It's then the responsibility of the compiler to handle the behavior. This is known as undefined behavior. In essence, a language is weakly-typed if type-confusion can occur silently (undetected), and eventually cause errors that are difficult to localize. Weakly-typed languages can be exploited if these undefined behaviors are not caught at runtime (for instance, a buffer overflow might be caught by the operation system as a segmentation fault, given that the access violation is severe enough).

There can be real performance advantages with weakly-typed languages, at the expense of security. Novice programmers be warned.

Type coercion is *not* defined as a weak typing feature; weakly-typed languages handle undefined behavior in inconsistent ways, because that behavior is not defined in the language. Type coercion, as defined in JavaScript, is guaranteed to give the same result of the coercion every time. Thus, this is still strongly-typed behavior.

In terms of language design, statically-typed languages are *better performing* than dynamically-typed languages. If the compiler has more information about the data in the program, then it can perform optimizations more easily. However, the restrictions of statically-typed languages mean that there are less ways to write the same thing. Thus, dynamically-typed languages are *more expressive* than statically-typed languages, in that there are infinitely more possibilities to write a given program.