# Characteristics of JavaScript 
July 21, 2022

To review, we've previously covered strong vs weak typing, and static vs dynamic typing.

For JavaScript, it is a dynamicly, strongly typed language. It's an object-oriented language with prototype-based inheritance. It is interpreted, garbage collected, and JIT-compiled (typically).

## JavaScript

### Interpretation vs Compilation
How do we make a programming language "real?" In other words, how do we run the programs that we write? An interpretation is based on a direct approach: you write an interpreter program in a language, which will directly run another program (written in a different language). A compilation, on the other hand, is a translation of code by a compiler into a separate runnable program. 

We can also consider transpilation, which takes a language and compiles it to another interpreted language; the terminology can become a little muddled depending on how fine the hairs are spilt, though. 

For instance, Java code in a `.java` file doesn't compile to machine code. It's compiled to Java bytecode by the `javac` compiler and stored in a `.class` file, which is translated to machine code by the `java` interpreter.

### Just-in-time (JIT) compilation
Generally, compiled code is faster; a high-level language input is turned into a low-level language output. However, compilation to machine code is not universally recognized by all computer processors. In C and C++ code, for example, both the compiler and way the code is written must be configured for the intended platform. Interpreted code are characteristically more agnostic in regards to the system on which they are executed.

JIT compilation allows an interpreter to perform selective compilation *at runtime* - this allows for average performance equal to or better than equivalent compiled code, while still remaining mostly system-agnostic.

Shouldn't this eat into how fast your program is running? Since the interpreter is examining the code as it runs and compiling sections of the program in multiple phases, it is typically able to perform optimizations dynamically. Even if an assumption used to attempt an optimization is wrong, and it slows the runtime down 1000x, it will only happen very few times and will be optimized for "hot" computations, resulting in incremental performance improvements for each iteration over many iterations. In fact, Java can outperform C for large inputs, due to JIT compliation.

### Brief history
Java and JavaScript are NOT the same. They're made by different companies for very different reasons. Java was developed by Sun Microsystems, which was bought by Oracle. JavaScript was developed by Netscape, which led to the creation of the Mozilla Organization before Netscape proper was acquired by AOL.

JS was designed and implemented in about 10 days - due to intense browser competition at the time, the prototype release was rushed and the language has a number of significant quirks and faults.

Lets write some code:

```
function foo (x) {
	if (x < 10) {
		return 3;
	} else {
		return "hello";
	}
}
```

For `foo(1)`, we will see an output of 3 as expected. For `foo(123)` we will see "hello" outputted. If we assign a variable `temp = foo(123)` we will see `undefined` as an output. Be warned! This is not the same as undefined behavior, and this has led some to believe that the language is weakly-typed. If we later call `temp`, it will output `hello` as expected.

There are many weird behaviors associated with JavaScript. It was designed to be executed client-side, from a webpage. If there's an error, and an exception is thrown, the page would probably crash. This means that the user has a bad time and will be unable to use the webpage. The "quirks" of the language minimize the impact that errors will have on the experience of the user - the language is intentionally designed to push through exceptions as much as possible.