# Higher-order Functions cont.
July 26, 2022

## Worksheet exercises
We started a worksheet at the end of the last class to display how exactly functions in JavaScript can take a function as an argument.

1. Write a function named callMe which takes a function `foo` and will call `foo`:

``` javascript
//this is one way:
function callMe(foo) {
	foo();
}

// this works too (ES6 syntax):
const callMe = foo => foo();

// callMe can then be called as normal:
callMe( () => console.log("hello") );
```

2. Write a function named indirectIf which takes a boolean and two functions. If the boolean is true, call the first function. Otherwise, call the second function.

``` javascript
function indirectIf(someBoolean, first, second) {
	if (someBoolean) {
		first();
	} else {
		second();
	}
}
indirectIf(true, () => console.log("hello"), () => console.log("goodbye"));
```

3. Write a function named indirectWhile which takes two functions. The first function returns a boolean, and the second function returns nothing. indirectWhile should call the first function, and if the result is true, it should call the second function followed by a recursive call to itself with the same parameters. If the first function returns false, indirectWhile does nothing.

``` javascript
const indirectWhile = (foo, bar) => {
	if (foo()) {
		bar();
		indirectWhile(foo, bar);
	} else return;
}

const f1 = () => true;
const f2 = () => ();
indirectWhile(f1, f2);
```

4. Write a function named wrapAdd which takes a function (which itself takes one  
parameter) and an integer. wrapAdd should return a new function which takes a  
parameter, and will add this parameter to the integer before calling the passed function.

``` javascript
const wrapAdd = (foo, num) => {
	return add => foo(num + add);
}
```

## List Routines
Most functional programming languages discourage the use of loops (Scala), or don't implement them at all (Haskell). One might think that not using loops forces a programmer into using recursion, but this is not true.

JavaScript has functional programming features, like higher-order functions, which allow us to simplify list processing without writing explicit loops.

### `forEach()`
This method acts on a list and is similar to a `for` loop - it does not return anything and is used for side-effects operations.

```javascript
[1, 2, 3, 4].forEach( el => console.log(el) );
// 1
// 2
// 3
// 4
```

### `map()`
For situations where you want to modify the elements of a list, without mutating the original list, this method will return a new list with each of the original elements "mapped" with a specified transformation to the same index in the new list.

```javascript
[1, 2, 3, 4].map( el => el + 10 );
// [11, 12, 13, 14]
```

### `filter()`
This method returns a new list of elements from the original list which satisfy some conditional.
```javascript
[1, 2, 3, 4].filter( el => el % 2 === 0 );
// [2, 4]
```

### `reduce()`
This method allows us to 'flatten' the list using an accumulator and an operation. If an initial value for the accumulator is not given, it will default to the first element of the list and start at the 2nd element of the list.

```javascript
[1, 2, 3].reduce( (prev, curr) => prev + curr );
// 6
```