# Prototype-based Inheritance
August 2, 2022

JavaScript does object-oriented programming in a much different way than Java. The prototype-based model of OOP is much more flexible than the class-based model.

## Map data structures
In statically-typed languages, type checking is often performed using a map, where a variable name is mapped to a type. Objects in JS are implemented as maps. Maps are an unordered collection of key-value pairs.

Operations on maps include adding or deleting a key-value pair to the map, checking if a key is in the map, and retrieving a value associated with a key from the map.

Maps have a few very important properties - namely, all of the above operations are, in most applications, performed in constant time (for mutable hash maps; depending on the language and how it implements maps, runtime may approach O(log n) in balanced tree implementations or O(n) in uncommon circumstances).

## JS objects
Objects in JS are commonly declared using an object literal, meaning that no constructor is explicitly called:

```javascript
let obj = {};
```

Objects are mutable:

```javascript
obj = { 'foo': 1, 'bar': true};
```

Object keys (also known as fields or properties) can be accessed using either dot syntax or bracket syntax. Keys can be reassigned at will and are not restricted to initial types. Accessing a field which is not defined on the map returns `undefined`.

"Constructors" can be defined using functions and the `this` keyword:

```javascript
function Rectangle(inputWidth, inputHeight) {
	this.width = inputWidth;
	this.height = inputHeight;
}

let r1 = new Rectangle(3, 4);
```

The execution of the above function as a constructor is completely dependent on the `new` keyword. Otherwise, JS just sees `Rectangle()` as any other function.

Objects can also inherit properties from other objects, by referencing the object in a `__proto__` field. When an undefined field is accessed, JavaScript will recursively go up the prototype chain, checking for the definition of that field, until the global object is reached.

Methods in JS are simply functions defined on an object field. However, it is important to define methods on the object prototype, rather than defining them as an instance property on the object itself. Otherwise, each instance of the object will reserve memory for the method, and can become very inefficient at scale.