# Prototype-based Inheritance cont.
August 4, 2022

## Exercises cont.
2. Consider the JavaScript code below. What is the output of this code?  
```javascript
function AddThis(x) { this.x = x; }
AddThis.prototype.add = function (y) { return this.x + y; }
let withOne = new AddThis(1);
let withFive = new AddThis(5);
console.log(withOne.add(1));
console.log(withFive.add(2));
```

Output:
```javascript
2
7
```

3. Write JavaScript code which will effectively add a sub method to all instances of AddThis, where sub should subtract this.x from its parameter and return the result. As a hint, you'll need to add it to AddThis' prototype. 
```javascript
AddThis.prototype.sub = y => y - this.x;
```

4. Write JavaScript code which will add a mul method to only newly-created instances of AddThis, where mul should multiply this.x with its parameter and return the result. Newly-created AddThis instances should have the same add and sub methods as before, without repeating their definitions. Existing instances of AddThis should not have a mul method. As a hint, you should not modify AddThis' prototype.
```javascript
const oldProto = AddThis.prototype;
AddThis.prototype = new Object();
AddThis.prototype.__proto__ = oldProto;
AddThis.prototype.mul = y => this.x * y;
```

## Programming paradigms
As a short review, we've covered a couple of varieties of the object-oriented paradigm of programming. In essence, paradigms are just different ways of thinking about how to write and structure code. A few paradigms include:
- imperative programming (like C) where variables and state are carefully mutated over the course of execution
- OOP (Java, JS, Python) with an emphasis on objects and methods
- functional programming (Scala, Swift, Haskell) with an emphasis on functions, specifically higher-order functions
- logical programming (Prolog) which emphasizes mathematical logic