# Swift
August 9, 2022

Swift was constructed by Apple, but it is able to be installed on both Linux and Windows.

Functions in Swift have a differnet syntax than Java or C:
```swift
func myFunc() -> Int {
	let temp = 18;
	return temp;
}

let result = myFunction();
print(result);
// 18
```

Swift code can be compiled using the command `swiftc <FILE>` and results in a `.swift` file, which is a Mach-O (native OS X code) executable. Swift is statically typed, and infers types for variables based on their assignment (which means, functions must have a declared return type). Parameters must also be typed, and functions must be called assigning actual parameters to their formal parameters:
```swift
func printInt(value: Int) {
	print(value);
}

printInt(value: 5);
// 5
```

Parameters can also have external and internal name assignments:
```swift
func printBool(param b: Bool) {
	print(b);
}
printBool(param: true);
// true
```

Single quotes are used only for character literals, and double quotes are used for string literals. Conditions in loops and conditionals do not require parentheses. Semi-colon line terminators are inferred. Swift supports higher-order functions. 

## Exercises
1. a. Define a function named add which takes the Int parameters a and b and adds them together, returning the result of the addition. The caller of add should need to provide the labels a and b.
```swift
func add(a: Int, b: Int) -> Int {
	return a + b;
}
```
1. b. Call add with parameters 2 and 3 (hint: this won't be the same as Java).
```swift
add(a: 2, b: 3);
```
2. a. Define a function named sub which takes two Int parameters, subtracts the second from the first, and returns the result of the subtraction. The caller of sub should not need to provide any labels.
```swift
func sub(_ a: Int, _ b: Int) -> Int {
	return a - b;
}
```
2. b. Call sub with parameters 4 and 5. (hint, this will be the same as Java).
```swift
sub(4, 5);
```
3. a. Define a function named callsFunc which calls a passed function with a given parameter, returning the result of the call. callsFunc should have the following signature:
   `func callsFunc(f: (Int) -> Int, i: Int) -> Int`  
```swift
func callsFunc(f: (Int) -> Int, i: Int) -> Int {
	return f(i);
}
```
3. b. Call callsFunc with the following parameters:
   - A higher-order function that adds 1 to its parameter and returns the result
   - The integer 5
```swift
callsFunc(f: {x in x + 1}, 5);
```
4. Define a function indirectIf which takes a Bool and two functions. If the Bool is true, it calls the first function, returning its result. If the Bool is false, it calls the second function, returning its result. Example calls are shown below (you should be able to determine indirectIf's signature from these):
   ```swift
   // returns 2
   indirectIf(true, ifTrue: { 1 + 1 }, ifFalse: { 2 + 2 })
   // returns 8
   indirectIf(false, ifTrue: { 3+3 }, ifFalse: { 4 + 4 })
   ```
```swift
func indirectIf(_ bool: Bool, 
				ifTrue: () -> Int, 
				ifFalse: () -> Int) -> Int {
	if (bool) {
		return ifTrue();
	} else {
		return ifFalse();
	}
}   
```

