# Trees cont.
October 13, 2021

## Binary Search Tree Operation Efficiency
Retrieval, insertion, and deletion of nodes in a BST, on average, are O(log n), with worst case being O(n). Traversal is O(n) of course, as each node is visited. If data is inserted in a sorted order, then a BST behaves similarly to a singly linked list (hence the O(n) worst case), however as data is inserted/deleted/retrieved with more randomness, the time complexity advantage becomes more apparent.

A binary tree of height *h* is **full** if nodes at levels less than *h* have two children each. Thus, every node that can exist at a height *h* is occupied by a node.

A **complete binary** tree is one which is full to one level less than its height (h - 1), and the last level h is filled as much as possible from left to right

## Binary tree representations
Binary trees can be represented using:
- Pointer implementations, with each node pointing to two children
- Array implementations, with the root at index 0 and children of a node at index *i* located at indices *2i + 1* and *2i + 2* (and thus, parents of children located at the **floor** of *(i - 1) / 2*).

Array implementations are nice when you have a full, or at least a complete, tree. However, we encounter null elements for trees which have leaf nodes above the last level. We can construct rules to manage these null elements (such as defining -1 to represent an empty node) or just strictly use complete trees.

## Heaps
A **max-heap** is a complete binary tree where each value is greater than or equal to all of its descendents, where the max element is always the root.

A **min-heap** is the opposite, where it is also a complete tree where all parent nodes have a value less than its descendents.

A heap is NOT a binary search tree! BSTs imply a sorted hierarchical order, but are not necessarily complete. Heaps maintain completeness and order, but only among descendants of a certain node (no ordering among siblings).

### Insertion/Deletion
New items are placed in next empty position, and bubbled up as necessary to maintain the min/max ordering. Similarly, removal of max/min items must keep the completeness of the tree, so nodes may need to be reordered. Insertion carries a worst case complexity of O(log n).

### Find/Delete node
Heaps aren't typically used to hold things outside of an ascending/descending order, so finding or deleteing a specific node (that isn't the min/max) is not very efficient. Heaps are used typically for ordered structure, like a priority queue.