# AVL Trees
October 27, 2021

Binary Search Trees have an optimal behavior for search/insert/delete of O(log n) for a balanced tree. In the worst case, the tree behaves like a linked list and search/insert/delete takes O(n) time. For degenerate behavior to be avoided, the balance of the tree must be maintained over all insertions and deletions.

## Balanced trees
Balanced binary trees include: 
- AVL trees
- Red-Black trees

Balanced N-ary trees include:
- B-trees
- B+-trees

### AVL trees
A BST is not necessarily always balanced. AVL trees were discovered by two Russian mathematicians in 1962: If T is a non-empty BST, then T is an AVL if and only if its left and right subtrees are AVL trees and | left height - right height | <= 1. Or, in English, an AVL tree is a tree which is balanced, but not necessarily complete or full. By maintaining this balance, we can sustain the O(log n) behavior. The maximum difference between subtrees rooted at **any** node is a maximum of 1.

Balance factors can be defined as the level of balance that a node contributes. AVL aims for values of -1, 0, or 1. This property is added to the Node class of a tree to keep track of the balance of the overall tree. The pointer approach is the easiest way to implement an AVL tree node, with a property indicating its balance factor (int bf).

#### Insertion
Re-using the code for BST insertion can cause problems, because the tree could become unbalanced and violate the definition for an AVL tree. Thus, balance factor data for **all* nodes through a subtree must be updated upon insertion. If balance factors are greater than |1|, then a rotation of the nodes can maintain balance in an O(1) operation. 

There are four possible violations that could occur:
1. Inserted into the left subtree of A’s left child (LL)
2. Inserted into the right subtree of A’s right child (RR)
3. Inserted into the right subtree of A’s left child (LR)
4. Inserted into the left subtree of A’s right child (RL)

