# Hash Tables
November 3, 2021

A hash table is a collection of key/value pairs which provides virtually direct access to an object (based on the key). Each key is unique; however, two keys may refer to the same value.

A simple hash table is an indexed array, where the index is the key and the element data is the value. When a hash table is in use, some keys may refer to "empty" values.

## Hash values
Unique indexes are generated by a hashing function to avoid key collisions. The function converts a key to an index which is ideally unique; of course, this uniqueness is limited by the quality of the ability of the hash function to generate unique values based on input. This grows more difficult as the hash table increases in size.

When a collision occurs, a method called linear probing may resolve the pro blem quickly; simply move the insertion index forward until an empty position is found. A need for linear probing gives us an insertion time complexity of O(n).

### Hash lookups
To find a key, run it through the hash function and then iterate through the collection, starting at the computed index and circling back to the beginning if necessary, to find the item.

### Deletion
Deleted key/value pairs must be marked to avoid search problems. For instance, a value can be assigned to null or 0 to indicate an empty table position.

## Improvements
Array based hash table implementations have a problem; due to linear probing, entries tend to cluster together over the length of the array. Thus, quadratic probing can eliminate this grouping by incrementing probing jumps exponentially.

However, the most used method to find empty spots for insertion or to search a value is to use separate chaining. This is implemented as an array of linked lists. Each element is a list! Thus, by inserting a new entry into the start of any given list, we can achieve O(1) insertion.

As well, deletion and searching can also be reduced to approximately O(1) by way of amortized analysis, by optimizing when to start a new list at a new index position in the array. This greatly reduces the problems posed by collisions by allowing for a list of values mapped to a key (i.e. a search for "abc" and "cba" under a simple hash function might refer to the same index). Thus, lookup time does not grow significantly as the number of elements increases.

