# Bugs
September 22, 2021

There are bugs that occur with regularity in every high-level language. Recognizing common bugs will speed up your development and will avoid a lot of frustration.

## Common bugs

### Accidental Override
This error occurs when a variable name is re-used inside of a function, giving scope preference to the local variable's value as long as the program is inside the function.

### Off by one
Occurs when a loop either doesn't iterate over every intended element or overflows the bounds of the iterable object.

### Omitting curly braces
A conditional or loop can consist of one statement and the curly braces can be omitted. However, this introduces the opportunity to accidentally omit braces in a multi-statement block. 

### Null pointer exception
This occurs when an uninitialized variable is referenced using dot or bracket notation, i.e. calling a method on a variable which has not been assigned to a constructor method. NullPointerException can be thrown when:
- invoking a method from a null object
- accessing or modifying a null object field
- accessing the length of a null object, as if it were an array
- accessing or modifying slots of a null object, like an array
- throwing a null object as if it were a Throwable object
when synchronization is attempted on a null obj

### Equals comparison
The "==" operator compares references - basically, this compares to see if the objects occupy the same memory address. The equals() method is usually uses to compare object values instead.

### Assignment vs. Comparison
In conditionals, be careful not to use an assignment operator ("=") instead of a comparison ("==") in the condition statement.

### Passing by value
In method arguments, an object is passed to methods as a pointer. However, primitive types like int, float, etc. are passed by value. So, a re-assignment of an int will only be visible in the scope of the method, whereas an object re-assignment in a method will persist after the method frame closes *as long as* the object is not instantiated as a final.

## Debugging
Debuggers are very versatile tools. Rather than manually inserting print statements in your code to trace an error, debuggers can drastically reduce the time it takes to resolve errors.

Debuggers can:
- Run programs
- Make a program stop at specified breakpoints
- Give info about variables, memory, and stack at specific points
- Step through a program