## Introduction

This class explores the ways in which information is exchanged between humans and the computers they use. A huge part of engineering software is the focus on how to use it - if the software isn't usable, what's the point?

We will focus on an Agile implementation user experience (UX) design of human-computer interaction (HCI).

### Usability
How easy is it for people to perform a particular task using a system (or a component of a system?) How well does that system support the performance of the task? Lets think about a door:
- Why do door knobs always turn the same direction to open?  
- Why are door knobs installed at waist height?  
- Why would some people rather use a small side door next to a large revolving door?  
- Why do some doors have knobs, while some have bars?  
- Why do doors have dampers and closers?  
- Why do doors have see through windows?  
- Why do doors lock only from outside with keys?  
- Why do people decorate doors?

Even a simple device like a door has a lot of factors influencing the user experience!

There are 5 major attributes of good usability:
1. Easy to learn
2. Efficient to use
3. Easy to remember
4. Few user errors
5. Subjectively pleasing

We can think of these attributes through the contexts of design, evaluation, and implementation. Considering these engineering activities is a major portion of the process of HCI consideration and UX design. In making engineering decisions, there are likely to be tradeoffs in optimizing these attributes - a product might be easy to learn *or* efficient, but not maximally both.	