# The Wheel:  UX processes,  lifecycles, methods,  and techniques
July 15, 2022

## Introduction

Interaction describes the wide variety of communication and collaboration between a human and some artifact or object.  The scope of interaction is continuously evolving - even the realm of grocery store shopping has changed drastically in the last 20 years.

HCI describes a specific field of interaction between humans and a digital computing machine. The more colloquial term for this category is UX. Today, it is an enormously important factor in successful tech businesses - if users feel negatively about your software, your business won't attract a user base, and you won't get any funding.

UX is the totality of the effects felt by the user vefore, during, and after interacting with a product or system in an ecology. The way that a user "feels" about an interaction with a computer can have a number of influencing sub-factors: physical interface, utility, meaningfulness, and emotional impact.

UX is often congregated with the design of user interface (UI); however, these are separate concepts. While both UX and UI heavily involve designing the interaction between the computer and the user, UX is more focused on the design of the interaction, rather than the design of the interface between the user and the computer. In short, designing UX looks at the attributes of the interaction that will occur, and designing UI looks at how that interaction is implemented.

*finish the synopsis of chapter 1 here*

## The Wheel
Like any design or engineering activity, UX is driven by a process. Process gives us a guiding structure which offers reliability and consistency in how a design is approached from project to project across different teams. A good process allows for iterative learning and improvement, as well as metrics and communication.

The UX design lifecycle involves fundamental activities:
- understanding needs
- designing solutions
- prototyping candidates
- evaluating results

**Understanding needs** involves analyzing the business domain and the requirements of the stakeholders. This is analogous to the Requirments gathering step of an Agile software engineering process.

**Design** is characterized by the creative human activities in which ideas are synthesized and assembled into interactive concepts. The design step involves a process of its own, with creation following initial, conceptual, intermediate, and production intervals:
- **Design creation:** ideation and sketching, innovation, low-fidelity prototyping
- **Conceptual design:** mapping user mental models to system models
- **Intermediate design:** Information architecture, screen layout, navigation, medium-fidelity prototyping
- **Design production:** Detailed design, visual comps, style guides, annotated wireframe prototyping

**Prototype candidates** are the results of the design step, and represent real possibilities in how the UX of a product will ultimately be represented.

**UX evaluation** collects user reviews, identifies critical issues, analyzes data, and refines designs accordingly.

These four steps create **The Wheel,** an iterative, recursive, bi-directional process for UX design.

The 4 main activities of the Wheel process can be broken into sub-activities (such as elicitation of requirements in the design creation step); methods to complete the sub-activities (such as usage modeling); and techniques to approach the methods (such as sketching). Techniques are frequently used in combination to perform a method, and methods are chosen based on the needs of the project.