# Chapter 3 + Chapter 4
July 18, 2022

## Scope, Rigor, Complexity, and Project Perspectives
### Rigor and Scope
We have a number of parameters which determine our choices for processes, methods, and techniques. **Rigor** describes the required level of precision and detail needed in the execution of the lifestyle activity; it is the degree of formality used, the meticulousness of the datakeeping, and the level of thoroughness in completing methods. This idea of rigor may most recognizably apply to data collection for usage research and design evaluation, in that data should be complete and pure (no opinionated comments or inferences). It is measured on a scale of interaction and work domain complexity - as an interaction gets more complicated (from a simple e-commerce website on one end of the scale, to an FAA air traffic console on the other), or as the context of the work involves gets more critical, the need for rigor increases.

**Scope** refers to how large or small the "chunks" of product modules are for each iteration of delivery. The UX team delivers design in chunks:
- To client and user for evaluation  
- To Product Owner or Product Manager  
- To SE people, who “consume” chunks as requirements for implementation

### Complexity 
Large scope is usually associated with the Waterfall-esque development processes, whereas more Agile processes envelop lifecycle activities with smaller scopes.
Risk aversion is an influence on the need for rigor as well. The less tolerance there is for risk, the more rigor is required. Of course, the level of risk is not always constant throughout the lifespan of the project - often a project requires less rigor to bootstrap quickly and get rapid prototyping in action. Resource limitations, such as budgets, schedules, and team metrics, can also affect the level of rigor possible.

The speed of UX methods depends on the need for rigor. If rigor is engineered to the minimum point necesssary, UX design can take better advantage of abbreviated methods; this follows the principle of efficiency - you should always work as fast as you can, subject to constraints posed by need for rigor.

### Project Perspectives
Perspectives observing the project or product will vary as well - these perspectives will influence the level of scope and rigor. Examples include commercial product perspectives, enterprise projects, and personal learning projects.

## Agile UX - Lifecycle Processes and the Funnel Model
