# Chapter 5 + Chapter 7
July 20, 2022

## Prelude of Process Chapters

### UX design spaces
Real UX designers have a dedicated design studio in which they may become immersed in their work. This provides a space for co-location, collaboration, and an environment which lends to tackling design problems. Studios are used to analyze and discuss usage research, build and display data models, and externalize design ideas.

It's important for a space to be dedicated, not temporary, and have ample room for design artifacts, drawings, posters, etc. Comfortability is another big factor, and workspaces must be ergonomic and spacious.

### UX team roles
There are many responsibilities in a UX team. Key roles include:
- Usage Researchers
- UX Designers
- Graphic/Visual Designers
- UX Analysts

As well, a team may be managed by a Product Owner. This person is responsible for the success of the product. The owner makes sure that the product is on track with the vision and business goals, as well as making sure that the design process is followed. Owners are closer to the user or client, and is in charge of creating product concepts, user stories, and spirnt plans. They are also the main point of communication for clients, marketing, and engineering.

### Creating UX projects
A project is initiated by a marketing strategy, management edict, product sponsor, system client, inventive ideas, or perceived needs to improve an existing product or system. The commission for the project usually comes from the upper echelons of a business, and not from the team itself. It begins with some type of document, typically a contract or brief proposal. The UX team is responsible for filling in gaps of definition of desired capabilities. These desires are usually presented in a concept statement called a Statement of Work. Often, the lifecycle activities pursued in meeting these desired capabilities overlap and are iterated upon as necessary. This is where the Wheel UX process comes into play.

#### Understanding Needs
The goal of this lifestyle activity is to understand the business domain, users, work practice, usage scenarios, and the subject-matter domain. This step is usually done in the context of some kind of usage research.

<ins>Textbook chapters:</ins>
- Chapter 7: Usage research - data elicitation (Contextual inquiry)
- Chapter 8: Usage research - data analysis (Contextual analysis)  
- Chapter 9: Data modeling (Representations of important aspects to inform immersion and design)  
- Chapter 10: Requirements extraction

#### Design Concepts
The goal of this step is to create designs as candidate solutions. We start with ideation and sketching to create design candidates, generate design framings, low-fidelity prototyping, and rapid evaluation for design exploration.

There are usually two definitions that come to mind when one thinks of the word "design." There is a broad interpretation, where UX design encompasses the whole UX lifecycle process (that is, everything we do in UX is to produce a design). There is also a more narrow interpretation of the term, where UX design is just the lifecycle activity for design creation taking place during the Design Solutions box within the overall UX design lifecycle (in short, the creative human activity in which new ideas are synthesized and put together).
UX requires both interpretations of the term “Design” - both ways of using the term are useful, but we lack the vocabulary to distinguish them. Usually, as with most ambiguous English words, meaning will be obvious from the usage context.

<ins>Textbook chapters:</ins>
- Chapter 14: Design creation
	- Ideation and sketching to create design candidates, generate design framings, low-fidelity prototyping, rapid evaluation for design exploration
- Chapter 15:
	- Conceptual design
		- Mental models, system models, storyboards
		- Design to convey designer’s system model to users so they can form a correct mental model of how product/system works
	- Intermediate design
		- Illustrated scenarios, wireframes, medium fidelity mockups of design forerunners
	- Design production
		- Specify detailed design plans for implementation of the emerging design choice
		- High-fidelity visual comps (pixel perfect screen designs)
	- Content targets of intermediate design and design production
- Chapter 16: Designing the ecology and pervasive information architecture  
- Chapter 17: Designing the interaction  
- Chapter 18: Designing for emotional impact

#### Prototype Candidates
The activity of realizing and envisioning promising candidates involves creating representations of the design to the required fidelity. Like sketching activities, this is often performed in parallel with the previous lifecycle activity.

<ins>Textbook chapter:</ins>
- Chapter 20: Prototype Candidates
 
#### Evaluate UX
In evaluation, the designs are verified and refined with respect to the user experience they offer. Evaluation data is collected and analyzed, and the results are presented in a report. The entire lifecycle process then repeats as the report recommends.

Textbook chapters:
- Chapters 21 - 27

## Usage Research - Data Elicitation
Usage Research begins with eliciting data. This is also known as contextual inquiry; essentially, these are fancy terms for figuring out what the project is all about. The UX designer must understand the client's practice of their work, and be able to suggest improvements in the design (or complete redesigns of the work methodology). This is not simply gathering requirements, or asking users what they want. It requires thinking about the user's work in its context - how work is performed, where it happens, and what the goals of the work are.